# 1 Thessalonians 3 (ESV) 
*1 Therefore when we could bear it no longer, we were willing to be left behind at Athens alone, 2 and we sent Timothy, our brother and God's coworker in the gospel of Christ, to establish and exhort you in your faith, 3 that no one be moved by these afflictions. For you yourselves know that we are destined for this. 4 For when we were with you, we kept telling you beforehand that we were to suffer affliction, just as it has come to pass, and just as you know.*

Paul knew he and his team **were to suffer affliction**. When one works as hard for the Gospel, without rest, one cannot expect anything other than the attacks of Satan. It is the opposite of what we expect in this world. The world expects to be rewarded by God after having worked so hard, but it does not understand that suffering for the glory of God is the great reward, for it is the *proof* that one has worked *effectively* (cf. 1 Peter 4:12-14). For if the work was not effective, the Satan would have let this person continue his work. This is why the Satan does not (seemingly) attack the leaders of the Word of Faith #tags/theology/falsegospel/wordoffaith movement—but even blesses them, so that they will continue—because its followers will become weak and worldly "Christians", living in the flesh, living by "hypergrace" #tags/theology/grace/hyper instead of Biblical grace and with less and more than the Bible at the same time, meaning that they have removed the laws from the Bible and added so-called freedom to it.
The leaders are forgetting that which kept John Wesley #tags/famouspeople/christian/missionaries awake when he mentioned that after people stopped throwing rotten tomatoes at him, he wondered if he was actually preaching the Good News. One should always be aware, not of the threats and insults one gets, but at the sweet words, compliments and blessings (cf. Proverbs 29:5). For the former are from an honest heart—I am not saying that these people who insult you are honest, but that they are honest in their insults and truly hate you from their hearts (cf. Psalm 141:5)—but it is unknown what the motivation is of the latter. 

*5 For this reason, when I could bear it no longer, I sent to learn about your faith, for fear that somehow the tempter had tempted you and our labor would be in vain.*

Paul was very much afraid, and rightly so, that **the tempter** would get to the Thessalonians converts, who were truly converted, but lacked the wisdom—which the Jews had, but they were hostile to the Christians—and were surrounded by pagan religions all around them. Paul did not want their **labor would be in vain**, not for **fear** of his wasted efforts, but for the loss of their salvation. This does not mean that Paul thought anyone could lose their salvation but rather that it was uncertain to Paul (this is what I *presume*) whether one was actually saved or not. For if Paul knew for sure, he would not have said this. #biblestudy/theology/calvinism/osas However, Paul does call them fellow believers #todo/opzoeken , brothers and sisters—all terms that indicate the receivers of this epistle were true converts. This does not mean they truly are converts, but it does indicate that Paul accepts them as such, as is the case in practise, when we do not doubt about our fellow believers' salvation in our local congregations, but rather accept *a priori* that when one says he has been saved, he is. 
There are a few things to be said about this. 
1. Paul did not explicitly say the Thessalonians would lose their salvation. The vain labor could refer to Paul's teaching of living a holy life, which would have been in vain if the people disregarded his teachings. If people were to give in to their temptations this would not necessarily mean that they would lose their salvation as well. 
2. There is still the question whether Paul knew for certain, through the insight of the Holy Spirit, whether a person was saved or not. I presume Paul does not, also based on the reading of 1 Corinthians when some committed horrendous crimes against God. Thus when Paul writes "brothers" there, he surely is not speaking of *all* the Corinthians. 
Another verse that seems to hint at this is v.2 where Timothy is sent to **establish and exhort** the Thessalonians **in** their **faith, that no one be moved by these afflictions**. The exhortation is done so that the Thessalonians would not be moved in their faith because of the afflication Paul and his team had to suffer. It is to keep them from being discouraged of spreading the Gospel themselves for fear of being persecuted. However, the establishing in one's faith I would interpret as something that is only needed for those who have *not* been established in their faith yet, or in other words, those who have not been saved yet. Thus, we cannot assume that the whole congregation of Thessalonika consisted of believers. 
By *definition* of course a congregation can *only* consist of believers, regardless of its officially subscribed members. For the church of God consists of only those who are saved. But there are always people part of that community who are not saved.

Either way, one's *persistance* in his holy walk *proves* one has been saved. For if he persists in an unholy walk, it is for sure—whether he was supposedly saved or not—that he is not saved right now. His said "salvation" and therefore "faith" was not genuine in the case of Calvinism, or it was, but is not anymore and he has now lost his salvation in the case of Arminianism.

**Example.** My own mother is one of those persons who is moved by these afflictions. She once told me she did not want to become a more radical Christian, because with it afflictions and persecution would come as well. When I told her that every Christian should be in the mission, she said that this was only for those who are chosen to become missionaries. She clearly has the wrong view of God and His commands, and unfortunately she has never been tought well concerning these things.
The avoidance of affliction is natural to people, but the Christian would not avoid affliction when it would defeat a higher purpose, which is to serve God. In other words, the *acceptance* of affliction is done when through it God is given glory. When one does not accept the affliction that glorifies God, it means that the person glorifies himself over God and thus cannot be called a Christian(Footnote: Perhaps there is a difference between doing this once or consistently). 

***Timothy's Encouraging Report***
*6 But now that Timothy has come to us from you, and has brought us the good news of your faith and love and reported that you always remember us kindly and long to see us, as we long to see you— 7 for this reason, brothers, in all our distress and affliction we have been comforted about you through your faith.*

Can you imagine that you are under great duress during the **distress and affliction** caused by the people around you, but that you are still need to worry about other people? Such was the case with Paul. Even though I presume Paul did not *worry* in the sense like we do—for he commanded the Philippians not to be anxious about anything (Philippians 4:6)—he must have *thought* about the Thessalonians and other people in the cities where he planted or aided local churches about what they would feel upon hearing about the afflictions he and his team were suffering and—for lack of a better word—"fearing" that they would be **moved** too much. On the other hand, however, hearing about **the good news of [their] faith and love** **comforted** Paul as well. 

*8 For now we live, if you are standing fast in the Lord.*

What would Paul have meant that he and his team **live, if you are standing fast in the Lord.** Did henot live before that? #biblestudy/questions Most certainly he did. Paul could have used a hyperbolic, such as when people say "this is the true life" when they enjoy their holiday on a beach. 
Fortunately *MacSBNnkjv* gives an explanation on this, indicating that the **standing fast** is a picture of "an army that refuses to retreat even though it is being assaulted by the enemy." This is the reason why they live and this is the reason why we live as well. Many sayings with similar messages, both Christian and non-Christian, have occurred throughout history, such as: #quotes
> Behind every successful man, is a woman.   
As Christians we know that behind every successful missionary is a person or team persistent in prayer. So if we lack success, we may start taking initiative at that point. 

*9 For what thanksgiving can we return to God for you, for all the joy that we feel for your sake before our God, 10 as we pray most earnestly night and day that we may see you face to face and supply what is lacking in your faith?*

Knowing this then, we can interpret v.9 as follows. Paul thanks God for the **joy** he feels because the Thessalonians have a good relationship with God. Even though Paul benefits from this relationship through their prayers—v.6 says that the Thessalonians **remember** them and I would presume this includes prayer for them as well—he does not so much thank God for His safety and blessings, but rather for the Thessalonians' growth. 
It is like the 80s movie #tags/movies *Iron Eagle* where an army jetfighter pilot is captured by the Iraqis and his son, who had not even finished his pilot training yet, comes to save him. Upon seeing his son his first thoughts probably were not how glad he was to be saved, but amazement and surprise—and perhaps thanksgiving as well—at how his son had matured. 

At the same time v.9 is also a question. What is the best **thanksgiving** to **return to God**? It is the thanksgiving of children in unity. A father would be proud of one child if he obtained success in life—not material success, but immaterial success in the field of having built character, for example. However, nothing would make a father more proud of his children if they were all successful with the help of each other. 
**Example.** My Chinese neighbor (who lived across my parental home) was such an example. As the eldest of four or five siblings he left Singapore and went abroad searching for work in the Netherlands in the 70s. With no money and education, he used his hands to work in construction, building up and renovating restaurants and other buildings, and even owned—though unsuccessfully—a restaurant once or twice. All the money he did not spend, he sent back to his siblings to pay for all of their studies, even though he had a family and two, and later three, children to raise. 
As I heard, all of his siblings went on to become managers or directors at big corporations, or professors at universities, and were—at least materially—very successful. His own children did very well as well, one of them having become a professor in cardiology. 
Unfortunately, my neighbor's father probably passed away before all this came to fruition—which is why he had to work so hard to take care of his family—and never had the chance to be proud of his children. 
During my neighbor's deathbed his youngest son was still in college. He was about to pass away, but something withheld from doing so, but he was unable to speak, due to the cancer that had spread everywhere. His two oldest children saw he wanted to go, but could not and presumed his hesitation was because of his responsibility to take of his family, which was not completed yet. They comforted him with these simple words:
> It's ok, dad, you can go. We will take care of Xing Wen and mom.  
And then he left. He left as a man proud of the visible character instilled in his children to take up the responsibility to take of their own family, leading the way by example. 

*11 Now may our God and Father himself, and our Lord Jesus, direct our way to you, 12 and may the Lord make you increase and abound in love for one another and for all, as we do for you, 13 so that he may establish your hearts blameless in holiness before our God and Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus with all his saints.*

In the next chapter Paul compliments the Thessalonians with their character and their love for one another, but urges them—almost desperately, it seems—to do so even more. Here, too, he asks the Lord to **increase and abound [their] love for one another**. It seems like something on the field of love is still going wrong in Thessalonika, which Paul does not explicitly mention or want to mention. What could these things be and what would the reason for this be? #biblestudy/questions
Perhaps Paul had seen too many examples of churches that were *almost* **blameless in holiness** and then fell out of God's favor. Take for example the church of Ephesus (see Revelation 2) which *lost* its first love. Though it is not possible for the Christian to lose His salvation nor fall out of favor with God, for he will ever grow to become more like a Christian #biblestudy/theology/calvinism/osas —for if he does not, he does not have the Holy Spirit—but for a church this is possible when the next generation has not been trained in the right ways (cf. 2 Timothy 3:17) nor discipled in a persistent and continuous way (cf. 2 Timothy 2:2). 
Perhaps Paul's explicit longing for the *blameless holiness* is exactly *because* of what the Thessalonians had already accomplished. Sometimes one hopes and desires most for the person who is almost there. 
**Example.** In all of the World or European football (i.e. soccer) championships where the Netherlands played I was never very interested in the play-offs (i.e. the first few matches), but the more they neared the end, the more exciting it got. 

#biblestudy/devotionals/1thessalonians
