# 1 Thessalonians 2 (ESV) 
***Paul's Ministry to the Thessalonians***
*1 For you yourselves know, brothers, that our coming to you was not in vain.*

It is not really clear what the **for** is referring to, for there are many statements made in the previous paragraph and Paul uses many sidetracks. However, referring to either of these statements makes no sense. For example, if this "for" referred to verse 5b, this would render the complete verse as follows. 
> (1:5b) ... You know what kind of men we proved to be among you for your sake. [...] (2:1) For you yourselves know, brothers, that our coming to you was not in vain.  
The same could be done with the statements in vv.4, 10 or with statements in-between. It seems most logical that because vv.4-10 are sequential reasoning, where each verse explains the previous one, that the *for* in 2:1 is either referring to the beginning or the end of this pericope, that is somewhere around v.4 or as a continued reasoning of v.10. In case of the latter, it is strange why the ones who thought up the #todo/opzoeken/engels indeling van Bijbelhoofdstukken decided to create a chapter between 1:10 and 2:1. 
The reason I write "somewhere around v.4" is because depending on where *exactly* the "for" refers to, this will have a big difference in meaning. #todo/nogaftemaken 

If this should be interpreted as 
> 4 For we know, brothers loved by God, that he has chosen you, ... [2:1] For you yourselves know, brothers, that our coming to you was not in vain.  
This would indicate something like: "Our coming to you was not in vain, for God has chosen you". 
The schematic below shows how each "for"-statement explains a statement made in the previous paragraph. 

(hier plaatje van maken)
* 2 We give thanks to God always for all of you, constantly mentioning you in our prayers, 3 remembering before our God and Father your work of faith and labor of love and steadfastness of hope in our Lord Jesus Christ. 
* 4 For we know, brothers loved by God, that he has chosen you, 
	* 5 because our gospel came to you not only in word, but also in power and in the Holy Spirit and with full conviction.

* You know what kind of men we proved to be among you for your sake. 6 And you became imitators of us and of the Lord, 
	* for you received the word in much affliction, with the joy of the Holy Spirit, 7 so that you became an example to all the believers in Macedonia and in Achaia. 
		* 8 For not only has the word of the Lord sounded forth from you in Macedonia and Achaia, but your faith in God has gone forth everywhere, so that we need not say anything. 
			* 9 For they themselves report concerning us the kind of reception we had among you, and how you turned to God from idols to serve the living and true God, 10 and to wait for his Son from heaven, whom he raised from the dead, Jesus who delivers us from the wrath to come.

#biblestudy/questions 
* 1 Thessalonians 2:1-12 (ESV) 1 For you yourselves know, brothers, that our coming to you was not in vain. 2 But though we had already suffered and been shamefully treated at Philippi, as you know, we had boldness in our God to declare to you the gospel of God in the midst of much conflict. -> ::we give thanks to God for you and remember you *because* our coming to you was not in vain::
	* 3 For our appeal does not spring from error or impurity or any attempt to deceive, 4 but just as we have been approved by God to be entrusted with the gospel, so we speak, not to please man, but to please God who tests our hearts. 
		* 5 For we never came with words of flattery, as you know, nor with a pretext for greed—God is witness. 6 Nor did we seek glory from people, whether from you or from others, though we could have made demands as apostles of Christ. 7 But we were gentle among you, like a nursing mother taking care of her own children. 
	* 8 So, being affectionately desirous of you, we were ready to share with you not only the gospel of God but also our own selves, because you had become very dear to us.
		* 9 For you remember, brothers, our labor and toil: we worked night and day, that we might not be a burden to any of you, while we proclaimed to you the gospel of God. 10 You are witnesses, and God also, how holy and righteous and blameless was our conduct toward you believers. 
			* 11 For you know how, like a father with his children, 12 we exhorted each one of you and encouraged you and charged you to walk in a manner worthy of God, who calls you into his own kingdom and glory.

#todo/nogaftemaken 

*2 But though we had already suffered and been shamefully treated at Philippi, as you know, we had boldness in our God to declare to you the gospel of God in the midst of much conflict.*

After they had been beaten with rods in Philippi (see Acts 16:19ff) it took a lot of courage to continue to spread the gospel, albeit in another country. It would take even more courage **in the midst of much conflict** which was the case (see Acts 17:5ff). But they still did so, for this courage was not from themselves, but it was rather **boldness in our God**. 

*3 For our appeal does not spring from error or impurity or any attempt to deceive, 4 but just as we have been approved by God to be entrusted with the gospel, so we speak, not to please man, but to please God who tests our hearts.*

There is only one **appeal** here, and that is the call to faith. There is no other motive here than **to please God**. In these days, starting a church can be a very profitable business.  L. Ron Hubbard #tags/famouspeople, author of science-fiction novels and founder of Scientology #tags/religion/scientology, even said once that if he could not get rich with his books he would start a church. Perhaps he meant this sarcastically, but he eventually did so as his *religion* is called the "Church of Scientology". Also, people like Joseph Prince, Joyce Meyer and Joel Osteen #tags/famouspeople #tags/theology/falsegospel/prosperity have amassed great wealth through their church and book sales, all the while promoting prosperity through their preaching. 
However, in Paul's day, and especially with Christianity, there was no ulterior motive nor could there be one. They did not make themselves popular with the ones they tried to reach (the Jews), the rulers of the country (the Romans) nor the rich people in the country (see notes on v.2 above) but attracted mostly the poor and the sick—hardly any people by whose support they could ever profit. 

*5 For we never came with words of flattery, as you know, nor with a pretext for greed—God is witness. 6 Nor did we seek glory from people, whether from you or from others, though we could have made demands as apostles of Christ. 7 But we were gentle among you, like a nursing mother taking care of her own children. 8 So, being affectionately desirous of you, we were ready to share with you not only the gospel of God but also our own selves, because you had become very dear to us.*

Paul and his team showed the right characteristics that should belong to every missionary—the lack of **greed** nor seeking of **glory** and the sharing of **the Gospel of God** and their **own selves**. Paul always went a step further than what was required. He could have asked for wages, but he did not. He could have told the Philippian leaders of the city that he was a Roman citizen *before* he was beaten, but he did not. Everything he does, is for the benefit of the Gospel. He could have shared less than his own self, but he did not. 
Do missionaries share their own life or do they train others so that they will share their life with them only? Does the missionary speak of his own problems, his sins, ilnesses and mental issues for example? I have heard that Spurgeon had depressions #todo/opzoeken reference, if he wrote about this, that is a good example of how a "missionary" needs to be open and transparent towards his (potential) flock. More often than not, however, we see in churches that there is no transparency in this field. People have such a high image of reverends, because they only speak about their highs and never about their lows. 

*9 For you remember, brothers, our labor and toil: we worked night and day, that we might not be a burden to any of you, while we proclaimed to you the gospel of God. 10 You are witnesses, and God also, how holy and righteous and blameless was our conduct toward you believers. 11 For you know how, like a father with his children, 12 we exhorted each one of you and encouraged you and charged you to walk in a manner worthy of God, who calls you into his own kingdom and glory.*

Paul calls himself and those on whose behalf he writes this letter **holy and righteous and blameless**. At a certain stage in life one can say all this about oneself without being arrogant. What is perceived by us in the West as arrogant—but also in the Middle-East and Far East—Paul has done more than once in the New Testament. #question how is this perceived in Iran? Apparently Paul thought otherwise. This could be cultural thing, but it could also be more than that, namely a righteous act of speaking out one's accomplishments. 
Paul is very aware of not boasting and when he does so, he explicitly mentions that he does so for a reason—for example when he boasted of his credentials he mentioned that he does not care about any of these if he didn't have Jesus #todo/opzoeken  and when he spoke of his sufferings #todo/opzoeken  2 Corinthians? and his shipwrecks, it was for the reason of showing how great his love was for the Gospel and for the people he reached out to #todo/nogaftemaken 

*13 And we also ::thank:: God constantly for this, that when you received the word of God, which you heard from us, you accepted it not as the word of men but as what it really is, the word of God, which is at work in you believers.*

How grateful one should be when one comes across Bible-believing people! When one explains the message of the Bible or anything in it, very often people do away with the facts, the stories and the morality. Even apologetic facts are discarded in favor of their own worldview and due to their stubbornness. The worst thing is when even Christians do not accept **the Word of God** as such, rejecting literal six-day Creation, God's hatred for divorce all the way up to the acceptance of homosexuality. But if any **accepted the** Word *when* they **received** it, this person is blessed to believe like a child—but in the same way, and perhaps even more blessed—is the one who believed *and* spread the message.

*14 For you, brothers, became ::imitators:: of the churches of God in Christ Jesus that are in Judea. For you ::suffered:: the same things from your own countrymen as they did from the Jews, 15 who killed both the Lord Jesus and the prophets, and drove ::us:: out, and displease God and oppose ::all mankind:: 16 by hindering us from speaking to the Gentiles that they might be saved—so as always to ::fill:: up the measure of their sins. But wrath has come upon them at last!*

The Thessalonians mentioned here (not those in Acts 17:11) were good Christians, for they were **imitators** of the **churches ... in Judea**. These churches were the first to be planted, most likely by the apostles themselves and therefore most reliable and Biblical. #todo/opzoeken/engels Bijbelgetrouw They imitated not only the church, but also the suffering **from the Jews**. Suffering cannot be imitated but merely overcomes one, however, it does overcome those who are most like Christ. (Footnote: Except for Christians all around the world, Uyghurs in China, Muslims in Sri Lanka and India, and Buddhists in Myanmar #todo/opzoeken are persecuted as well. Though not all them are guilty of terrorism, they suffer from the consequences of the hatred which the Satan planted in their enemies. They do not glorify God through their suffering (cf. Matthew 5:10 and #todo/opzoeken  .)
The Jews **killed both the Lord Jesus and the prophets** (cf. Stephanus' last speech #todo/opzoeken ) and now have killed many Christians or driven them out. They have displeased God and that is not something that should be taken lightly. 
> The Lord is pleased with those who love Him, for those who live according to His Word. Is there a "but" here? #todo/opzoeken but He hates those ...  

Paul is saying some really harsh words here by stating that the Jews displeased God and opposed **all mankind**. This is true for the very reason they **hindered** Christians **from speaking to the Gentiles that they might be saved**. Not only did they fail on this mission themselves, by being a light of truth to the peoples of this world, but they showed their bad traits. Morally speaking Jews are in bad daylight, they might be smart and rich, but they are known as thrifty (in a negative way) #todo/opzoeken/engels zuinig, gierig, crooked, even up to the point of being wicked (see for examples books written on the plans of Jews to control the finance system, the Rothshields #tags/conspiracy/illuminati and George Soros #tags/famouspeople). Whether all of this is true or not, admittedly the Jews have shown their bad side. To make things worse, the one group that endeavored to show God's truth to the world, the Christians, they *hindered* from speaking to Gentiles! 
So in other words, they are not behaving well, they are even behaving badly, and they are preventing any Jew from behaving well or teaching others to behave well. It is logical that their **measure** is filled. God has explicitly warned the Jews, but this applies for everyone, that their punishment is great if any person should let any child #todo/opzoeken/engels verkeerde pad opslaan. Now it is especially wrong when this person concerns a child, but even doing this to an adult will be very wrong to say the least. #church/material/sermon

What then is this **wrath** that Paul speaks of, and what does mean by **at last**? It sounds as if he has been waiting for the Jews to receive the punishment they deserve. Though God is never pleased with the #todo/opzoeken/engels perishment of a sinner, it could be that Paul was in his human flesh, for all the torture he underwent, though forgiven by him, but having given this  vengeance to God #todo/opzoeken  reference. Either way, what exactly was this wrath? #todo/opzoeken Perhaps the Jews suffered their own kind of persecution (e.g. the Jewish War in 70AD) which was after the time of writing. But perhaps there were some precursors that Paul heard about before the Jewish War indicating that the wrath was coming or perhaps Paul simply knew about it. It could also be that the wrath of God came in another form, such as the hardening of their hearts.

***Paul's Longing to See Them Again***
*17 But since we were torn away from you, brothers, for a short time, in person not in heart, we endeavored the more eagerly and with great desire to see you face to face, 18 because we wanted to come to you—I, Paul, again and again—but Satan hindered us. 19 For what is our hope or joy or crown of boasting before our Lord Jesus at his coming? Is it not you? 20 For you are our glory and joy.*

Paul has a **great desire** to see each other **in person**, **face to face**, not only to hear about them, which is why he sent Timothy (3:1-4), but also to meet his brothers and sisters. We cannot say that his desire would lessen if he were to have Zoom or Skype. Did Paul endeavor less **eagerly** after receiving news from Timothy about them? No his endeavor was as great before Timothy's departure as after his return.  
Video conferencing is great technology that we can make use of to further the Gospel and train missionaries around the world from a distance, and for so many other applications as well, but they were never meant (by God) as a *replacement* for live contact. Even the creators of this technology and these software products did not intend this—even though I do not know their true intention—but it would be fairly logical to assume that the creators intended this product for people to meet who *could not* meet each other in person. 
Hence, the argument that live streams could replace church services must be rejected. Even if they could replace part of the service, they can never replace every element of it—the meeting with brothers and sisters, the breaking of bread, the sharing and utilizing of talents and gifts to build up one another #todo/opzoeken references—all for the glory of God! A Christian should not go for any church service less than that. Every Christian himself is responsible for these elements in the church—the leaders are responsible for the teaching of from the Scripture, but the rest is done by the body. 
During the Corona "pandemic" (Footnote: The definition of "pandemic" was changed before the onset of COVID-19 in November 2019 and COVID-19 would not have qualified as such with the previous definition. #todo/opzoeken reference) many churches closed their doors for visitors and congregation members and went to stream their services live, justifying the call *not to neglect meeting together* (Hebrews 10:25) with the argument that it is possible to meet each other online. That, of course, is a fallacy, for logical reasons which I will not go into here, for the reasons of brevity #todo/opzoeken/engels , vanwege de tijd, maar later hier nog link toevoegen naar waar ik het er wel over zal hebben (ander boek, hoofdstuk)—but even if their reasoning was correct, the reasons above are more than sufficient to refute their argument not to meet each other as well. #church/material/sermon

#biblestudy/devotionals/1thessalonians
