# 1 Thessalonians 5 (ESV) 
***The Day of the Lord***
*1 Now concerning the times and the seasons, brothers, you have no need to have anything written to you. 2 For you yourselves are fully aware that the ::day of the Lord:: will come like a thief in the night. 3 While people are saying, “There is peace and security,” then sudden destruction will come upon them as labor pains come upon a pregnant woman, and they will not escape. 4 But ::you are not in darkness::, brothers, for that day to surprise you like a thief. 5 For you are all children of light, children of the day. We are not of the night or of the darkness.*

Paul commends the Thessalonians with yet another thing, which is their awareness of the **times and seasons**, meaning that that the Thessalonians are not like the people in the parable in James or Matthew #todo/opzoeken/reference who planned their business as if they had many more years. No, the right attitude for the Christian is to always be **aware that the day of the Lord will come like a thief in the night**. Jesus could come at any time, and even though this might still take many years—and a few hundred years ago, this would still take hundreds of years—still we need to know that even though Jesus is not coming tomorrow or next year, everything we do, is part of the preparation for that. 
It would be like a servant postponing his work until the last week before his master arrives back from his journey. This servant thinks he is able to finish every task within a week, but if he does not manage to finish it all, he is going to be in big trouble. In the same way, we—who know that the Lord is coming soon, but not yet—need to prepare ourselves physically and mentally for what is coming. We need to mourn over what the government is doing to its people, for what it is doing *now* through fear and indoctrination through the media, is preparing the people for the Great Reset—which they believe will come, but which they might not be able to implement before Jesus' return. As Christians we need to convert as many people as possible so that they will not be part of the Great Reset but rather be part of the Great Commandment (Matthew 28:18) and the Great Transformation in our minds (Romans 12:1) and the Great Transfiguration ( #todo/opzoeken/reference then all will rise (1 Corinthians?) and Jesus' transfiguration on the mount). 
The Great Reset was to take places in 2030 (Footnote: The Great Reset was initially part of Agenda 21, which was created in 1996 and to take place in 2021. They, that is the World Economic Forum and other conspirators, discovered that 2021 was too early for them and that they did not have enough time, after which they postponed it to 2030.) but has now already been accelerated to take place in 2025. Should we as Christians not accelerate the furthering / spread #todo/opzoeken/engels of the Gospel so that will come sooner as well? Do we not want to meet Him sooner but also prevent as many people as possible to be hurt by the Great Reset? 
So it is our job to be awake during these times. The Kingdom of God is not a time for eating and drinking and sleeping ( #todo/opzoeken/reference ), but it is of work to glorify the Father. Jesus worked every day to glorify the Father, even on the Sabbath, and so we can work every day as well, as long as it is to glorify the Father.

*6 So then let us not sleep, as others do, but let us keep awake and be sober. 7 For those who sleep, sleep at night, and those who get drunk, are drunk at night. 8 But since we belong to the day, let us be ::sober::, having put on the breastplate of faith and love, and for a helmet the hope of salvation.*

If in a certain world there are those who work at night, such as criminals who work in the nightly hours who want to prevent their criminal activities from being seen, and suppose there are also righteous people who work during the day and sleep at night, what will happen during the night then? The "bad" people would be drunk and awake at night and do whatever they do at night, but the righteous people would be asleep. Verse 6, however, tells us (i.e. the Christians) not to sleep but to be awake, sober and to put on our Christian attitudes. 
How should a Christian sleep then if it is expected of him to work during the day? The answer is that the "day" referred to in v.8 is part of a different "day and night" than the "night" referred to in v.7. In the latter verse Paul is referring to a literal day and night, of this world, where things get dark at night. In v.8 Paul is referring to a *spiritual* night. This world has its "regular" days and nights, where Christians are allowed to rest in the nights. Furthermore, Christians should work without fear of exposure of their work. Yet this world has fallen into the night, or perhaps one could call it a dusk, where the Satan is bringing its darkness into whatever remaining light in this world (even though the Bible calls this world a dark place, for the only light there is, is that of Christ and His followers). Now in this world of darkness the Christian must stay awake, for He is not part of this darkness and must never participate in any of these dark activities. 
So despite the contact we have with people from the dark side, we must still live in the light. Even if the world has completely gone dark, we can *emit* the light from the spirit that is within us and shine this light on others so that they can see it and perhaps follow it as well. As long as the Christian does not fall asleep, this light will always shine in the world. 

This light shines through the character of Christ, which is why Paul calls upon the Christian to **put on the breastplate of faith and love, and for a helmet the hope of salvation**. In Ephesians 6 we also see these pieces of the spiritual armor, but the breastplace there stands for righteousness. Since these are symbolic items, the difference in wording should not matter much as the breastplate could be applied to many things. Paul could have used any two items to indicate the Roman soldier's attire, but perhaps most recognizable would be these two. In the Netherlands, but perhaps also elsewhere around the world, one can buy accessories of the knight's armor in toy stores. The smallest package contains these two items whereas larger packages contain a shield, sword and arm protection. So it is likely that Paul merely wanted to refer to the full armor rather than explaining every piece in spiritual terms as he did in Ephesians 6. 
However, we should stand still at why Paul used faith, love and hope here and why he assigned the former two to the breastplate and not the other way around. As mentioned before, the helmet has the same #todo/opzoeken/engels assignation as in Ephesians 6. Hope protects one's mind in any and every situation. No matter the direness of the situation, hope is the way out. This helmet does not necessarily refer to a *rational* hope, because it protects the *head*, just like our feelings take place within our thought processes within the brains as well. 
The breastplate here stands for faith and love and they protect the heart and other vital organs within the rump #todo/opzoeken/engels romp , among which the kidneys, which David speaks of in Psalm 139, and refer to his innermost being. In the same way that the breastplace protects most of the body, love and faith encompass most, that is two-thirds, of the Christian—for love and faith are all that remain when the rest has been stripped down (cf. 1 Corinthians 13:13). 
Next to hope, these two things are *vital* for the Christian life. One cannot be called a Christian when he has no faith, nor can he be called such when he has no hope. For a Christian is one who hopes in Christ and His return and to be with Him and to become like Him. If he has no hope as such, then *what* does he hope for? 
Lastly, a person with faith and hope, but without love, can not be a Christian. It is impossible to be *like* Christ, but not to emit the love of Christ. One cannot be like light, but be dark; or like water, but be hard. In the same way the Christian shows what Christ *is*, which is love—not merely the source of love, but love itself. 

So in short, the reason why Paul uses the breastplate and helmet as a symbol, is because these two symbolize the entire armor and with it the entire Christian. 
#church/material/sermon

*9 For God has not destined us for wrath, but to obtain salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ,*

~~This verse is not a proof of the theory of election and predestination~~ #biblestudy/questions Can this be used as an argument? #biblestudy/theology/predestination/election . In the context the "us" is referring to the Christians Paul is writing to and Paul's team themselves. They indeed have been destined to obtain salvation. This of course can be generalized in order to apply to all Christians but in a more general sense it speaks of God's purpose, which is that God originally destined man to be with Him and not to suffer His eternal wrath. 
Of course, God did not change man's destiny over the course of his actions, but with "original" I mean that God wanted this. Things on Earth, however, do not happen as God wants them to happen, for God has given man free will. This is the difference between God's original plan and His current plan. In the original plan—that is, what God *wanted*—there was no redemption nor **salvation**, for man would have been faithful from the start until the end and lived together with God in the garden of Eden. But in actuality man has chosen not for God but for himself, leading to the **wrath** of God. The only way that is left now, is when God has destined some to obtain salvation so that God could still have heaven with part of His creation. 
Why would God then save only some? If all of mankind does not seek God, but God changes the heart of some, why can he not change the heart of more or of all of mankind? Romans 9:14 for example says that God can have compassion on whom He wants to have compassion, and later on #todo/opzoeken/reference  it says that we do not have the right to ask God such an impertinent question. 
Perhaps it is for the simple reason as explained in Romans  #todo/opzoeken/reference  that some were created and punished so that others might be saved (see also notes there), but there could be many other reasons which we will never understand or will ever be able to comprehend with our puny little minds. 

*10 who died for us so that whether we are awake or asleep we might live with him.*

Paul uses a play on words here. First he uses the word "sleep" in vv.6-7 for the literal sleep and figurative sleep, that is meaning those who are not aware of the circumstances. But here in v.10 he is referring to the eternal sleep, which is death. The more complete, but less poetic, translation would then be: #composed/bible/1thessalonians
> so that whether we are awake and alive, or dead, we might live with him.  

*11 Therefore encourage one another and build one another up, just as you are doing.*

The **therefore** here is a strange transition from the previous verses to this one, and a strange motivation to **encourage one another**. Should we connect this *therefore* to v.10, then it is because God destined us to salvation, and that is why we need to encourage one another. However, this would be an indirect motivation. 
If a father is good to his child and then tells his child to be good as well, it would be a direct motivation (sort of) for he would have seen his father and imitate his behavior. But if a father saves his child from drowning, what would motivate the child to be good to other people or, as in this case, **encourage one another and build one another up**? 
Of course one can think of several answers here, one of which being that when one's life has been saved, most will automatically think of how to better their life and the first thing that comes to mind then is to benefit the lives of others. 
It is also possible to connect this *therefore* to v.6 and thus that we should encourage one another *because* we are the ones who are awake and have the responsibility to awaken others by encouraging them. 

The Thessalonians were already doing this, but Paul commands them to *continue* doing so. Again, a command to continue the good things they were already doing. (See also notes on #todo/opzoeken/reference  )
It is of utmost importance that Christian *continue* their work (#todo/opzoeken/reference  not that I have already obtained it... ) until their final day and be confirmed in their salvation—not that the Christian ever needs to doubt his salvation, but he can be confirmed in this. 

***Final Instructions and Benediction***
::*12 We ask you, brothers, to respect those who labor among you and are over you in the Lord and admonish you, 13 and to esteem them very highly in love because of their work. Be at peace among yourselves.*:: #biblestudy/memorization/todo

This verse is not only about the elders, but about anyone in the church who has a leading function. The Christian should realize that these people in a leading function **labor** harder than the average churchgoer. Not only do they work harder physically and spend more time in their ministry, they are also bearers of more responsibility. But with their responsibility and the accompanying admonishment they are also prone to criticism of the congregation. 
Note that Paul does not emphasize **respect** of the congregation, but he *does* emphasize the **love** they need to have for them. Leaders need respect, just like husbands do from their wives, which is shown through obedience, but unlike women who have a natural built-in love for their husband and children, which men do not have—which is why God commands men to love their wives (cf. 1 Peter 3:7, Ephesians 5:24 #todo/opzoeken/reference ), the congregation does not necessarily—or better said, in most cases—have these feminine traits. 
In the intercultural and multicultural church I go to there is also the problem of different cultures #tags/culture between the leadership and the congregation. Whereas the elders are of the hot culture (Sri Lanka and Suriname) #todo not uitleggen wat het verschil is hier tussen of refereren naar andere notities. 
the congregation consists mostly of Western (Dutch) people. Now there is always the problem of rebellious men, but when culture plays a role, there is the possibility that men who *are* respectful come across as disrespectful, simply because the way of showing respect is different in the Dutch culture than in the hot cultures. 
Where the principle of respect is present in all humans, the outer appearance and way of showing this is defined by the rules of a culture. Love, however, transcends cultures, both in principle as well as in outward appearance. Yes, there might be different languages within love (see Gary Chapman's #tags/famouspeople/christian book #tags/books *The Five Love Languages*) but  these are present in all cultures. 

::*14 And we urge you, brothers, admonish the idle, encourage the fainthearted, help the weak, be patient with them all.::

In the previous verses Paul was not speaking only to the elders, because he was speaking about those who **are over you in the Lord and admonish you**. The elders do not have anyone (directly) over them, except the Apostles and perhaps also the *seven* (who are called *deacons* by some, but even if that is their name, these are not the same kind of deacons as in 1 Timothy 3:8-13). However, we should still not rule out the elders, for they too fall under this command, but still, this is more directed to the whole congregation which is under the elders. v.27 confirms this when Paul says that this whole letter needs to be read out loudly to the whole congregation. 

This shows that it is the task of every Christian to **admonish**, **encourage**, **help** and **be patient**. In my own words, these would be tasks that seemingly only teacher, preachers, deacons and pastors do, but Paul lets us know clearly that the *whole* congregation needs to do this. #church/material/sermon 
The full spectrum of the Christian life is depicted here as well. This admonishing is also shown in 2 Timothy 3:17—that is, *for teaching, for reproof, for correction, and for training in righteousness*—but next to admonishing, the Christian also needs to learn and receive these other things. *Every* Christian should fit the same requirements as that of the elder and deacon (2 Timothy 3), just like every woman and wife should fit the requirements of "the woman who fears the Lord" in Proverbs 31:10-31, Sarah (1 Peter 3:1-6) and the general command for wives (Ephesians 5:23)—likewise for men.  In the same way the Christian needs to be deacon (in the sense of giving aid), pastor, teacher and leader as well, of one's own house, and if given by God, of a team of people either within or outside of the local church. 

*::15 See that no one repays anyone evil for evil, but always seek to do good to one another and to everyone. 16 Rejoice always, 17 pray without ceasing, 18 give thanks in all circumstances; for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus for you.::* #biblestudy/memorization/todo

#todo/nogaftemaken 

::*19 Do not quench the Spirit. 20 Do not despise prophecies, 21 but test everything; hold fast what is good. 22 Abstain from every form of evil.*:: #biblestudy/memorization/nathan/todo

God has given us His Spirit for so many reasons—we can be close to Him as much as that is possible between sinful beings and a holy God. One the consequences of this is that we will become like Him and since He is the truth, we will become more faithful (as in not lying) and recognize the truth better as well. This #todo/opzoeken/engels houdt in that the Christian must discard everything that is not of the truth, which often are the irregular or supernatural manifestations. However, the Christian could go too far and **despise prophecies** that actually *are* of God, for God Himself is a supernatural being and works in likewise ways. 
The convincing power of the supernatural is great and many have used this to attract people for their own purposes. This has led to many sects and false religions, branching off of Christianity. 
The church—in this case probably the (Roman) Catholic Church—feared that people would follow these sects and had hence forbidden all these kinds of seemingly supernatural practices, which are described as witchcraft, #todo/opzoeken/engels doden opwekking, voorspelling, handpalmen lezen etc, ook reference opzoeken, and put all of this under the denominator #todo/opzoeken/engels juist woord? of witchcraft. Later on, however, the Roman Catholic Churches ( #todo/opzoeken What about Protestant churches?) abused this as a #todo/opzoeken/engels dwangmiddel to get rid of their opponents and anyone who was against an imposed rule or about to uncover the truth of the corruption within the Roman Catholic Church. 
However, all of this led to the demise of prophecies perhaps. If any had them, who would say them out loudly? If any could perform miracles, who would still do so? Not only the miracle itself would fall under witchcraft, but also the popularity of a Christian who healed someone, would eventually undermine the authority of the Roman Catholic Church, because this person would obtain a great following. 
Now I believe that a true prophet would have spoken out the truth, regardless of being burned on the stake, and this is what happened to (some or many, #todo/opzoeken still need to look up this) of them, such as John Huss and William Tyndale #todo/opzoeken/engels spelling #tags/famouspeople/christian/missionaries. A great many other Christians were not burned, but suffered otherwise for speaking out that which God wanted them to say, such as John Newton, who was against slavery, and John Wesley, who claimed that everyone was a sinner and needed to repent and ask for forgiveness. 
So the Roman Catholics, and later on Protestants as well, did not obeyed these commandments at all. They despised prophecies, they did not **test everything** and most of all they did not **hold fast what is good** and **abstain from every form of evil**, but rather did the opposite by being led by greed, lust and power. 

*23 Now may the God of peace himself sanctify you completely, and may your whole spirit and soul and body be kept blameless at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. 24 He who calls you is ::faithful::; he will surely do it.*

Note that it is God Who sanctifies us and thus keeps our **soul and body** **blameless**. Now how can Paul say this when our soul and body are definitely *not* blameless, even when we count only the days after our conversion? It is because God will sanctify us *just before* the coming of Christ. This is what it means when it is said that righteousness *will* be *credited* unto us (Romans 4:22)—which is written in the future tense—for it is only at the *end* that we will receive what is promised to us. Just like with a creditcard, the bank gets its money back at the end of the month. In the same way God will fulfill His promise at the end—even though we do not deserve this.  

*25 Brothers, pray for us.*
::*26 Greet all the brothers with a holy kiss.*:: #biblestudy/memorization/todo

*27 I put you under ::oath:: before the Lord to have this letter read to all the brothers.*
*28 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.*



#biblestudy/devotionals/1thessalonians

## #todo/opzoeken  

Zie notities bij v.13: 

Drie mogelijke problemen waarom de oudsten moeilijk kunnen communiceren met de gemeente of hun boodschap verkeerd overbrengen.
1. Verschillen in cultuur
2. Gebrek aan pastorale vaardigheden
	1. Voorbeeld. Leander Janse, ontwapening. 
3. #todo wat was dit ook alweer? Misschien verschil in opvatting

Who are Bill Gates' children? 

