# Luke 6 (ESV) 
**Jesus Is Lord of the Sabbath**
*1 On a Sabbath, while he was going through the grainfields, his disciples plucked and ate some heads of grain, rubbing them in their hands. 2 But some of the Pharisees said, “Why are you doing what is not lawful to do on the Sabbath?” 3 And Jesus answered them, “Have you not read what David did when he was hungry, he and those who were with him: 4 how he entered the house of God and took and ate the bread of the Presence, which is not lawful for any but the priests to eat, and also gave it to those with him?” 5 And he said to them, “The Son of Man is lord of the Sabbath.”*

**A Man with a Withered Hand**
*6 On another Sabbath, he entered the synagogue and was teaching, and a man was there whose right hand was withered. 7 And the scribes and the Pharisees watched him, to see whether he would heal on the Sabbath, so that they might find a reason to accuse him. 8 But he knew their thoughts, and he said to the man with the withered hand, “Come and stand here.” And he rose and stood there. 9 And Jesus said to them, “I ask you, is it lawful on the Sabbath to do good or to do harm, to save life or to destroy it?” 10 And after looking around at them all he said to him, “Stretch out your hand.” And he did so, and his hand was restored. 11 But they were filled with fury and discussed with one another what they might do to Jesus.*

The Pharisees did not answer, but Jesus did not wait a long time for an answer either, it seems. He did look around at all, but no one apparently had an answer. Why did Jesus not repeat His question so that He could defend Himself later on with their own words? Jesus could have forced them to say that it is lawful to do good on the Sabbath and to save life. On the other hand (no pun intended) Jesus knew that their anger would not be diminished any. The Pharisees were smart enough to know that their own reasoning was not sufficient to criminalize Jesus and in fact they were not angry at Jesus for trespassing or even changing the Law, but rather because of envy at His popularity and authority, and especially because His authority was greater than theirs and visibly proven by God by all the miracles that were done. 
It is sad to see that all of the miracles He did were not seen as proof of God's existence, through which man should worship at least God for giving us these miracles and showing that He really exists. But the Pharisees were so into aggrandizing themselves that they forgot what it was all about. 
To me this is hardly imaginable. One studies to become a theologian, a Pharisee in this case or a Catholic or Protestant priest in another, one learns to refute false teaching and to discern all forms of idolatry. Indeed, this is what they do then when *others* fall for any kind of idolatry, teach the wrong Gospel or sin—and the sin can be pointed by an exact verse or example in the Old Testament. But when it concerns their *own* sin—and I am talking about *their* sin in plural form, for there were multiple Pharisees, at the least they could have seen each other's sin—they either did not see it or deliberately knew among themselves that indeed they were sinful, but that it was worse to let another run off with the honor or even worse, to them Him destroy their influence and control of the people.
It is really hard for me to believe that there was a conspiracy going on in those circles, both within the Pharisee and Sadducee sects. Who would be so wicked to use the good, a religion, and corrupt it from the inside with premeditated plans on how to influence people and gain power and control over them? 
Could the same thing happen in our government or in governmental organizations such as the *United Nations* and its subsidiary medical branch, the *World Health Organization*? Could people actually be so corrupt that they have a plan to control this world by creating a virus (i.e. COVID-19 #tags/historic events/corona# to cause fear among the people so that their power would increase?
It is what the Pharisees did; it is what the Roman-Catholics did by claiming that they had power over who would be forgiven and who would go to hell. This state religion had been spread all over Europe and almost all people in the United States were Europeans. It would not be strange that the European countries and governments today are as corrupt as the Roman-Catholic church was or still is. They have become smarter by doing many good works as well—so smart even that they have tricked many Christians into believing that the government is good and should be obeyed. 
So the answer is *yes*, people can be so corrupt, even within the good organizations, having no limits to their wickedness in their moral conscience. Even a criminal who kills is not wearing a mask all the time or lying to himself that he is doing good, but these people inside the government, they are even tricking their own organization, because in the government there are good people as well. 
I think that in the Left Party #tags/politics there are people who have been brainwashed, normal people, and who actually believe they are doing the right thing. They actually want to help immigrants for example. Even Alexandra Ocasio-Cortez #tags/famouspeople could be one of those brainwashed people who really does not know what she is saying, just like Greta Thunberg #tags/famouspeople who clearly at that young age, 16 at the time, had been brainwashed by her parents into believing the whole theory of climate change being caused by humans.  
The real conspirators are a smaller group within the Left who actually plan ahead the big lines, which is to increase immigration to get more votes so that the Left will stay in power for a longer time. 
If that is possible within the government and within the largest organization of the world, the UN, and within the richest organizations in the world such as the *Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation*—leaving aside the private groups that are the most powerful in the world, who have never even claimed to do good, such as the Freemasons #tags/conspiracy , the Illuminati and the *Bilderberg Group* (who claims only to be a think tank)—and the *Rockefeller Foundation*. 
How can the Christian community, who is neither rich, powerful nor large, stand up against this movement in the world? There is only one way, by worshipping Jesus and proclaiming His Name, and that He is Lord of all and will—still—provide forgiveness for *everyone* who *repents* and *believes* in Him. In other words, we can do nothing, but Jesus will do the work, but He wants as many people saved before He comes to judge. Even now, some within of the mentioned organizations could still repent and be saved and even help us to expose the wickedness of these organizations. 

**The Twelve Apostles**
*12 In these days he went out to the mountain to pray, and all night he continued in prayer to God. 13 And when day came, he called his disciples and chose from them twelve, whom he named apostles: 14 Simon, whom he named Peter, and Andrew his brother, and James and John, and Philip, and Bartholomew, 15 and Matthew, and Thomas, and James the son of Alphaeus, and Simon who was called the Zealot, 16 and Judas the son of James, and Judas Iscariot, who became a traitor.*

It took Jesus all night to pray to God, it seems, so He could choose the right twelve disciples. Through this prayer, I expect, God also planned the meetings Jesus would have with this disciples as Jesus met each of them "coincidentally" the following day. Did Jesus need so much time to confirm each disciple through prayer? Did He not know already which ones were going to be His disciples and what each strengths and weaknesses were? Or was He praying so long about Judas Iscariot, to ask God why He should accept Him or to ask Him how He should behave towards someone of whom He already knew was going to betray Him three years later, while stealing money from the #todo/opzoeken/engels pot 
Jesus knew about this and I guess the disciples did not, but they did know afterwards and the only way I can think of is that Jesus told them in His last forty days on Earth. 
If Jesus, Who already knew which people would be His disciples, which one would betray Him and steal from Him, and knowing all the weaknesses of each disciple and their future as well, after His ascension, but still needed a whole night to pray to God, do we not also need more time to pray for the things of which we do not have all this information? 
Suppose you are looking for a partner, this is what you do not know: 
You do not know who it is, the weaknesses and strengths of this person, whether he or she is reliable and what he or she will do in the future, let alone, after your death. The same goes for a career or a new house. We need prayer to make our decisions—whole nights of prayer, at the *least*!

**Prayer.** Forgive me, Father, for I have sinned by not praying enough to You about my choices. All the choices above for each of my jobs, my house and even my current partner were choices without enough prayer where I relied too much on myself and too little on You and the provision You have for me.
You know our thoughts and You have a plan for us according (cf. Jeremiah 29:11). Help us to trust more in You and to show it  by spending our time in prayer. 
In the Name of Jesus I pray. Amen.  

**Jesus Ministers to a Great Multitude**
*17 And he came down with them and stood on a level place, with a great crowd of his disciples and a great multitude of people from all Judea and Jerusalem and the seacoast of Tyre and Sidon, 18 who came to hear him and to be healed of their diseases. And those who were troubled with unclean spirits were cured. 19 And all the crowd sought to touch him, for power came out from him and healed them all.*

**The Beatitudes**
*20 And he lifted up his eyes on his disciples, and said:*
*“Blessed are you who are poor, for yours is the kingdom of God.*
*21 “Blessed are you who are hungry now, for you shall be satisfied.*
*“Blessed are you who weep now, for you shall laugh.*
*22 “Blessed are you when people hate you and when they exclude you and revile you and spurn your name as evil, on account of the Son of Man! 23 Rejoice in that day, and leap for joy, for behold, your reward is great in heaven; for so their fathers did to the prophets.*

**Jesus Pronounces Woes**
*24 “But woe to you who are rich, for you have received your consolation.*
*25 “Woe to you who are full now, for you shall be hungry.*
*“Woe to you who laugh now, for you shall mourn and weep.*
*26 “Woe to you, when all people speak well of you, for so their fathers did to the false prophets.*

**Love Your Enemies**
*27 “But I say to you who hear, Love your enemies, do good to those who hate you, 28 bless those who curse you, pray for those who abuse you. 29 To one who strikes you on the cheek, offer the other also, and from one who takes away your cloak do not withhold your tunic either. 30 Give to everyone who begs from you, and from one who takes away your goods do not demand them back. 31 And as you wish that others would do to you, do so to them.*
*32 “If you love those who love you, what benefit is that to you? For even sinners love those who love them. 33 And if you do good to those who do good to you, what benefit is that to you? For even sinners do the same. 34 And if you lend to those from whom you expect to receive, what credit is that to you? Even sinners lend to sinners, to get back the same amount. 35 But love your enemies, and do good, and lend, expecting nothing in return, and your reward will be great, and you will be sons of the Most High, for he is kind to the ungrateful and the evil. 36 Be merciful, even as your Father is merciful.*

**Judging Others**
*37 “Judge not, and you will not be judged; condemn not, and you will not be condemned; forgive, and you will be forgiven; 38 give, and it will be given to you. Good measure, pressed down, shaken together, running over, will be put into your lap. For with the measure you use it will be measured back to you.”*
*39 He also told them a parable: “Can a blind man lead a blind man? Will they not both fall into a pit? 40 A disciple is not above his teacher, but everyone when he is fully trained will be like his teacher. 41 Why do you see the speck that is in your brother's eye, but do not notice the log that is in your own eye? 42 How can you say to your brother, ‘Brother, let me take out the speck that is in your eye,’ when you yourself do not see the log that is in your own eye? You hypocrite, first take the log out of your own eye, and then you will see clearly to take out the speck that is in your brother's eye.*

**A Tree and Its Fruit**
*43 “For no good tree bears bad fruit, nor again does a bad tree bear good fruit, 44 for each tree is known by its own fruit. For figs are not gathered from thornbushes, nor are grapes picked from a bramble bush. 45 The good person out of the good treasure of his heart produces good, and the evil person out of his evil treasure produces evil, for out of the abundance of the heart his mouth speaks.*

**Build Your House on the Rock**
*46 “Why do you call me ‘Lord, Lord,’ and not do what I tell you? 47 Everyone who comes to me and hears my words and does them, I will show you what he is like: 48 he is like a man building a house, who dug deep and laid the foundation on the rock. And when a flood arose, the stream broke against that house and could not shake it, because it had been well built. 49 But the one who hears and does not do them is like a man who built a house on the ground without a foundation. When the stream broke against it, immediately it fell, and the ruin of that house was great.”*

#biblestudy/devotionals/luke #tags/events/ascension