# Matthew 24:15-28 (ESV) 
***The Abomination of Desolation***
*15 “So when you see the abomination of desolation spoken of by the prophet Daniel, standing in the holy place (let the reader understand),*

Next to the two conventional interpretations—the desstruction of Jerusalem and temple in 70 AD and the coming of the anti-Christ in the end of the end-time—another interpretation is that this holy place is our body. Not only the Coronavirus, but also the transhumanist movement #todo/opzoeken  #church/sermons/@stevecioccolanti 20220316 last sermon 

*16 then let those who are in Judea flee to the mountains. 17 Let the one who is on the housetop not go down to take what is in his house, 18 and let the one who is in the field not turn back to take his cloak. 19 And alas for women who are pregnant and for those who are nursing infants in those days! 20 Pray that your flight may not be in winter or on a Sabbath. 21 For then there will be great tribulation, such as has not been from the beginning of the world until now, no, and never will be. 22 And if those days had not been cut short, no human being would be saved. But for the sake of the elect those days will be cut short. 23 Then if anyone says to you, ‘Look, here is the Christ!’ or ‘There he is!’ do not believe it. 24 For false christs and false prophets will arise and perform great signs and wonders, so as to lead astray, if possible, even the elect. 25 See, I have told you beforehand. 26 So, if they say to you, ‘Look, he is in the wilderness,’ do not go out. If they say, ‘Look, he is in the inner rooms,’ do not believe it. 27 For as the lightning comes from the east and shines as far as the west, so will be the coming of the Son of Man. 28 Wherever the corpse is, there the vultures will gather.*
#biblestudy/devotionals/matthew