# 1 Timothy 2 (ESV) 
***Pray for All People***
*1 First of all, then, I urge that supplications, prayers, intercessions, and thanksgivings be made for all people, 2 for kings and all who are in high positions, that we may lead a peaceful and quiet life, godly and dignified in every way.*

There are many types of prayers, four of which are mentioned here. The prayers of **supplications** consist of what we need, e.g. our daily bread, but also what the people in v.2 need. The **intercessions** are to ask God, as if being near Him, to help the ones we care about, but also those we do *not* care about, which is a hard thing to do. In that second category we find the people in v.2 again and they appear once more in the prayers of **thanksgivings** where we not only thank God for *everything* He has given us, but also for our kings and leaders. I do not know what **prayers** would refer to, except that it is complementary to the other three types of prayer. 
The **that** mentioned in the second part of the verse is implying that we need to thank our ruler *that* **we may lead a peaceful and quiet life**, for many rulers cause exactly the opposite of that, such as dictators in Cuba (Fidel Castro) and in many countries on the African continent. I think the hine-clause here is used, which means that we should translate this as #composed/bible/1timothy *so that* "we may lead a peaceful ... life". For if our leaders are saved, we will have a peaceful and quiet life. Is there any country in history who did not have peace under a Christian ruler? The books of Samuel, Kings and Chronicles already show this to be true for Israel's history, but the rest of world history is the same as in when there is a good king, the people are satisfied and there is no war. But what about neighboring countries who want to start war? There have never been any true Christian rulers in history, as far as I know, except for Abraham Lincoln perhaps, so this is hard to prove. The Old Testament shows us that even in the case of war and even when a king such as Hezekiah inherited a country that was impoverished and people that was mostly against God, God could still turn things around so that the people would believe in Him and the country—or in this case the city of Jerusalem—would flourish again. 
The history of the the United States shows this as well, for example in the case of Abraham Lincoln who won the Civil War #tags/historic events# (although not with a #todo/opzoeken/engels hele grote overwinning, tegenovergestelde van Pyrrhus overwinning) but also caused a major relief for the country. If the Civil War had not been won, perhaps the United States and the world as well would still have legal slavery and all of the other good things about the US would not even be present, such as technological innovation, Hollywood, education and all of the other good things, of which there are too many to mention. First of all, God would probably not have blessed the country with such wealth if it had been so immoral as to keep slavery. Second of all, if the Left were to have won the war, it would have been their socialist policies that were implemented, with all due consequences of economic turmoil which we see in socialist states such as California and New York. 
On the other hand, when we see a *Christian* governor reigning over the state—even though they do not have *completely* reign over the states—such as Ron DeSantis and #todo/opzoeken governor of Texas #tags/politics, states such as Florida and Texas will flourish. #todo/opzoeken voorbeelden hiervan

*3 This is ::good, and it is pleasing in the sight of God our Savior,:: 4 who desires ::all people:: to be saved and to come to the knowledge of the truth.*

When Paul writes **this is good** it seems as if Paul needs to explain that what he commanded in v.2 is good. God desired **all people to be saved** and he also desires them **to come to the knowledge of the truth**. Would there be any exception? Some would want God to exclude some, such as the leaders of the government. 
I once told a person that we have to pray for our country's leaders, she reluctantly agreed, but said afterwards: "For Rutte [the prime minister] it is already too late!" meaning that he had hardened his heart already. 


*5 For there is one God, and there is one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus, 6 who gave himself as a ransom for all, which is the testimony given at the proper time.*

 A mediator in a discussion or argument is—as far as I know—a person who stays out of the contents of the matter and merely *mediates* the conversation so that both parties understand each other correctly, and possibly offers solutions as well. Perhaps another kind of mediator is meant here, for the Father does not need a mediator in order to understand mankind, nor does He need any solutions from other.  But if not, then it is quite noticeable how the mediator himself puts himself in the line of battle.
It would be like a married couple having a fight over a house and in order to stop the fight, the mediator offers his own house. This is a **testimony** and the right example of what every Christian should do. 
When there is strife between two parties, such as during divorces, often one party is not willing to listen what the other party has to say anymore. The mediator then is there to bring across the message and to appease both parties. In this case Christ the mediator brings across the message from God to man—for God is not as stubborn and childish as man so as not to listen, but mankind is—but God does need to appeased for His righteous wrath is burning and will keep on burning until the sacrifice has been offered. 

 #todo/nogaftemaken 

*7 ::For this:: I was appointed a preacher and an apostle (I am telling the ::truth::, I am not lying), a teacher of the Gentiles in faith and truth.*

This verse is clearly making a reference to the previous two verses. Paul is **appointed a preacher and an apostle** for only **this** reason: that Jesus Christ is the **testimony** of God. Preaching the instructions in the verses starting from v.8 on is not his calling, but it is a consequence of the former. This is why Paul uses **then** in v.8, for it is *because* he is **appointed a preacher and an apostle** that he has to preach these set of commandments.  

*8 I desire then that in every place the men should pray, ::lifting holy hands:: without anger or quarreling; 9 likewise also that women should adorn themselves in respectable apparel, with modesty and self-control, ::not with:: braided hair and gold or pearls or costly attire, 10 but with what is proper for women who profess godliness—with good works.*

**In every place**, that is the holy places, there should not only be no unrest, but the **lifting [of] holy hands**, i.e. the *worship*, should be done **without anger or quarreling**. Of course Paul's **desire** is that there is no unrest *at all* but that is something that is impossible to ask of people, and could be maintained only for so long. But the least the Christian can do, and *is able to*, is to worship without quarreling. Now the question becomes what is worship? For usually quarrels are done outside of the Sunday service, but for example, during meetings concerning the church. The answer is that these meetings are also part of worship. Anything that is done for God is worship. A quarrel about the contents of a sermon is also going against Paul's desire. Let the Christian therefore quarrel only about things that are not part of the worship of God. It is best that there is no quarrel at all, but in no case let God's church be the reason for quarreling. 
For quarreling about the church would be like seeing children in hunger and need. Two people want to give food and aid to these people, but then start quarreling about which food and how to organize this. Is it not good already that the children are at least getting food? If there must be quarrel, then quarrel about the fact that there are children who have *no* food, not about those who do have and should get more. 

The second thing thing Paul asks of the congregation is **that women should adorn themselves in respectable apparel, with modesty and self-control**. Again (cf. 1 Peter 3:3) the question can be asked whether Paul means here that adorning should be done with the inner person rather than outer appearance or that there should be no outer apparel at all. The latter is interpreted by some of the more traditional flanks of Christianity by wearing no make-up or jewelry, such as by the denomination *Reformed Congregation* (*Gereformeerde Gemeente*) in the Nederlands(Footnote: The *Reformed Congregation* (Gerechtigheid, which is a denomination in the Netherlands, should not to confused with the denomination *Reformed Congregation in the Netherlands* (*Gereformeerde Gemeente in Nederland)*, which has almost the same theology, but is slightly less strict in its practices.) or even more traditional, the (traditional) Mennonites and the Amish. A less literal interpretation is taken by less traditional denominations. However, the practice of Paul's command does not correlate perfectly with the amount of liberalism. 
A graph of common practices in local congregations would show that as for *make-up* and *jewelry* (the *type 1 apparel*) there is a positive correlation between (more material) apparel and liberalism, but the percentage of women (and men) wearing head coverings becomes less. However, in some denominations the type 1 apparel is replaced by an apparal within the wearing of hats, but showing more #todo/opzoeken/engels uitbundig and larger hats and perhaps more expensive dresses, even though they should still appear modest. 
In Evangelical and pentecostal churches the lack of modesty and self-control is more on the field of amount of skin that is shown. Not rarely it is seen that people in these congregations wear short pants, dresses and much cleavage, while disrespecting the church even more by wearing slippers, as if going to the beach. 
In my personal experience there is a difference between pentecostal churches that mostly consist of black people and other churches. Black churches, regardless of their theology, tend to wear clothes that cover the body more, probably because of the publicly known problem of adultery and sexual immorality within the black community. This is not to say that other churches do not have this problem, but the percentage of single parent/mother families is significantly more within the black community, both within as well as outside of the church. 
#todo/nogaftemaken Tekening/grafiek 

*11 Let a woman learn quietly with all submissiveness. 12 I do not permit a woman to teach or to exercise authority over a man; rather, she is to remain quiet. 13 For Adam was formed first, then Eve; 14 and Adam was not deceived, but the woman was deceived and became a transgressor. 15 Yet she will be saved through childbearing—if they continue in faith and love and holiness, with self-control.*

There are many interpretations concerning the topic of whether women are allowed to speak, that is to teach, in church, in seminaries, courses, in some or all of those or for women and children only. Without going too much into this topic—this command of Paul is clear, both it and its context. Paul is instructing Timothy with rules for the congregation, which this whole letter is about, as Timothy is about to become a leader in some local congregation. More specifically, the context of this *paragraph* is about what men and women should and should not do. Men should pray and not quarrel—in the next chapter there are lists for elders and deacons (most likely men) of how they should behave. Women should behave as well—in their dress modestly and in learning, submissively. This has nothing to do with gossiping, asking questions during a sermon or any other thing. It is clear that this is about **[exercising] authority over a man**. 
God has chosen to form Adam first and then Eve, not the other way around. This is a sovereign choice made by God, which we cannot deny. Also, it was the **woman [who] was deceived** first. Those two arguments are given by Paul, of which the second perhaps is redundant, for the first one is sufficient to establish the social order between men and women as God has intended. 
However, Paul does add relief for the woman. Even though in a perfect world there is no problem for women with submission to a husband, in practice this is more difficult because of the pride of men. But women **will be saved through childbearing**, in my opinion meaning that the women will get a higher status because of her childbearing abilities. If men merely wanted progeny, they could have enslaved all women, used them as sex slaves and child bearers, but this is not how this is in most countries and cultures in the world. Women are respected and envied for having many children and even more when their children are strong and behaving well—although "well" is defined by the respective culture. They are treated well or even idolized in other cultures for their beauty, usually outward, but often for their inward beauty as well, just like the Jewish cultures praises the quiet and submissive woman as well as the Chinese and Japanese ones, and probably many other cultures that I do not know much about. 
Each sex has received its punishments but also the encouragement of God to praise Him with what has been given to one—for the men it is their leadership and strength, be it physically or mentally or spiritually, and for women it is their respect, quietness and submissiveness (cf. 1 Peter 3:1-6).  

#biblestudy/devotionals/1timothy
