# Romans 9 (ESV) 
**God's Sovereign Choice**
*1 I am speaking the truth in Christ—I am not lying; my conscience bears me witness in the Holy Spirit— 2 that I have great sorrow and unceasing anguish in my heart. 3 For I could wish that I myself were accursed and cut off from Christ for the sake of my brothers, my kinsmen according to the flesh. 4 They are Israelites, and to them belong the adoption, the glory, the covenants, the giving of the law, the worship, and the promises. 5 To them belong the patriarchs, and from their race, according to the flesh, is the Christ, who is God over all, blessed forever. Amen.*

I am repeating what Paul said, namely that he is not lying. He is uttermost serious when he speaks of being cut off himself just so that his Jewish brothers could know God. Of course, it is a small sacrifice, one might think, to offer one life so that millions of others may know God, but thinking it through, it is not such an easy choice to make. 
First of all, consider that Paul does not personally know these millions of Jews. Who would give up his life to save strangers? I'm sure there a few who would do that, although they would be in the minority. Now consider that many of those Jews wanted to kill you. Would you then be willing to die so that they may be saved? The choice instantly becomes harder and the number of people willing to do so have drastically lowered. Perhaps very rational people who count the value of life in numbers would come to the conclusions that millions of bad people are still worth more than one good person—either that, or it would be a very emotional person who would be willing to die, because he feels so much love for them. 
Now second of all, these people are not dying. The rational person who just counted the value of the lives not lost, suddenly loses a lot of utility gained, because these people's lives would not have been lost, physically anyway, and neither would Paul's.
#church/material gebruik ook het voorbeeld van berekening van de waarde van levens in nut en in geld voor epidemiologische doeleinden. 
Then comes the question, what is Paul exchanging then? Paul gives us something much more valuable than just his Earthly life. His life here on Earth is only 70 or 80 years, but his life in heaven and on the New Earth would be infinitely long. He would give up all of that to save a bunch of strangers would tried to kill him, even at the time of writing this letter. Paul has not even experienced this heavenly life, where the goodness of one day would be like thousands here on Earth combined—and still he is willing to give it all up for his "brothers". 
Perhaps Paul argued that the utility of many persons is always more than of a single person. A purely rational person would therefore always choose to give his life if it could save the life of more than one person, given that the sum of their utility is higher than he could enjoy. This means that a rational who would live at least ten more years would not give his life for two people who could live for five years at most. But that is not something Paul has to worry about, because the summed utility of a million Jews is always more than his' alone, even if he enjoys life with God much more than any other person in history. 
Now the comparison for non completely rational people, which all humans are, is made by the trade-off between the utility enjoyed by Paul himself as a Christian and the utility that Paul enjoys by seeing others become a Christian. Of course it a negative utility to see other people hunger or suffer in any kind of way. Christians, and most definitely Paul, would be willing to give up some of their utility so that they could increase in theirs, which at its core is a selfish thing, but not very surprisingly considering our evil hearts #todo/opzoeken  (where does it say our hearts are evil?)
the negative utility it causes to see others suffer is usually less than experiencing this negative utility ourselves. That is why there are traitors, who do anything to survive. They might feel grudge, but their will to survive and therefore not suffer themselves is stronger. 
Consider for example the person who could speak Japanese in the movie *Ip Man*. #tags/movies He was called a traitor because he translated for the Japanese, simply so that he would have a job. But it was through these translations that the Japanese could establish some things in Chinese territory. Now of course the Japanese would have found some other person to translate for him, if he would not be willing, and perhaps he would have died as well for refusing. But it still is choosing your own wellbeing over the suffering of others. 

~~But at the same time this allows him to see what is given then to these others.~~ 

*6 But it is not as though the word of God has failed. For not all who are descended from Israel belong to Israel, 7 and not all are children of Abraham because they are his offspring, but “Through Isaac shall your offspring be named.” 8 This means that it is not the children of the flesh who are the children of God, but the children of the promise are counted as offspring.*

Even though all children of Abraham are biologically related to him, they are not the offspring God referred to here. First of all, the Ishmaelites are not part of the promise, but second of all neither are all Jews. 

*9 For this is what the promise said: “About this time next year I will return, and Sarah shall have a son.” 10 And not only so, but also when Rebekah had conceived children by one man, our forefather Isaac, 11 though they were not yet born and had done nothing either good or bad—in order that God's purpose of election might continue, not because of works but because of him who calls— 12 she was told, “The older will serve the younger.” 13 As it is written, “Jacob I loved, but Esau I hated.”*

God already had purpose and elected some, God chosen us before we were in the womb, and this example of Esau and Jacob proves this. Jacob was chosen by God and Esau was not. #biblestudy/theology/predestination/election

*14 What shall we say then? Is there injustice on God's part? By no means! 15 For he says to Moses, “I will have mercy on whom I have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I have compassion.” 16 So then it depends not on human will or exertion, but on God, who has mercy. 17 For the Scripture says to Pharaoh, “For this very purpose I have raised you up, that I might show my power in you, and that my name might be proclaimed in all the earth.” 18 So then he has mercy on whomever he wills, and he hardens whomever he wills.*

I know that many theologians have discussed this issue of predetermination and many have raised arguments against election #biblestudy/theology/predestination/election. But nothing more can be said than what is clearly written in these verses. 
God has mercy on whomever He wills and according to His view this is fair and righteous, for God would never do anything that is not righteous. Even when God hardens a heart—and we know He hardened Pharaoh's heart after he rejected God's request three times and did not even love his people enough to let them suffer no more than three plagues—and even if He does this directly and not give a person three chances like He did with Pharaoh, then still it is righteous when God does it, for no one would have been susceptible to God's love unless God would have softened him and no one would have experience His love unless God had mercy on them and showed the love. 
Once more, God first needs to have mercy on someone and *show* His love, then the result is that this person cannot feel it, because we are hardened by nature. Then God needs to have mercy again on this person and let this person realize it by softening his heart. 
We can see this during a so-called *act of God*, such as a thunderstorm or tsunami. Some die and some survive, the latter are those on whom God had mercy, if you will, for the sake of argument. Now of these who survive, some will thank God, while others will not and merely think it is coincidence. The former are those whose hearts have been softened, let us say that the latter are those who have not been hardened, but they were hard by nature. Let us also say that everyone is equally hard by nature. 
Now except for letting them survive, God could be even more merciful to them and let a boat full of supplies float by right in front of their nose, while they are residing on the roof of a building, finding shelter for the storm. Those who are neutral then, might feel *something* of God, although they might doubt the coincidence, but others will still stick to their argument that everything is controlled by random events, and so is this boat. These people have most likely been hardened. 
Now I believe God is fair (according to our definition) and has given people like Stephen Hawking and Christopher Hitchens #tags/famouspeople plenty of chances, but even if He had not, it would still be fair (according to God's own definition). 

*19 You will say to me then, “Why does he still find fault? For who can resist his will?” 20 But who are you, O man, to answer back to God? Will what is molded say to its molder, “Why have you made me like this?” 21 Has the potter no right over the clay, to make out of the same lump one vessel for honorable use and another for dishonorable use?*

The first and foremost thing we have to realize is that we may not answer back to God—not in this way! Questioning God is different from asking God a question. Answering Him in this way is criticizing His plan. Who are we to talk in such a way, to propose suggestions to God if God is the One Who created us and our intelligence? The capacity with which we think was put into our minds and everything we are able to think of has been thought of by God since the beginning—but since God has no beginning it means He has always known this. 
We are talking back at God because we think the way He treats people is unfair. It is not. First of all, because God decides on what the definition of "fairness" is. It is we who do not understand the concept of fairness, just like I previously explained the example of a few people on death row #todo/opzoeken waar? 
and a president pardons them. But even that example or the induced and deduced definition of fairness thereof do not encompass the true meaning of fairness. Just like the law "thou shalt not kill" is more comprehensive than just about the killing of persons. Phinehas killed a person and was praised for it; Dennis Prager writes in his book *The Rational Bible: Exodus* #biblestudy/devotionals/books that murdering is killing with (bad) intent. But it most likely conveys many more definitions and explanation, perhaps more than all the smartest lawyers in this world together could ever comprehend. 
Now second of all, according to God's definition it is fair, but we cannot see it. Those who are rational define this as "all should play by the same rules." But let us take the example of comparing one student with another and evaluating whether each had a fair chance of getting into university. However, can one measure the amount of intelligence each had, the concentration, resources (such as time and money), emotional support (from their friends and family), physical comfort and other (meta)physical and psychological aspects? God alone knows whether something is *truly* fair or not. 

*22 What if God, desiring to show his wrath and to make known his power, has endured with much patience vessels of wrath prepared for destruction, 23 in order to make known the riches of his glory for vessels of mercy, which he has prepared beforehand for glory—*

In the previous verse we have read that the potter may decide whether he creates a pot for honorable or dishonorable use. Now the same goes for God and if He created someone like Hitler or Mao #tags/famouspeople, people who dishonor God, then God is still righteous in having created them, for the responsibility of their choices cannot be put on God. By the way, can God create anything that does not give Him honor? No, He cannot. Everything He makes is beautiful by His standard, whether it is a handicapped child or a future dictator like Stalin or Kim Yong-Un. When they were born they were beautiful, however, their jealousy, paranoia and everything in their upbringing that contributed to their ruthless dictatorship is what has made them ugly and dishonorable to God's creation. 
Now these verses go even further. When you do not read it carefully, it will say something like: "What if God has created vessels of wrath, just so that He can destroy it in order to show His power?" Now that would sound cruel or masochistic, but still, who are we to answer back to God? It would be like us creating clay puppets and destroying them. No one would criticize us for an act like that. 
As a side note: in a previous devotional on [Isaiah 55:9](bear://x-callback-url/open-note?id=37D75FC3-088F-47CE-8A55-EF6E4BD17438-57499-0004FF7E7D6A7CD2I spoke of a professor who debated against William Lane Craig who used the example of God creating sentient beings and then destroying them and that that would be harsh. However, he did not take into consideration the greatness of God and that the power distance in the relationship between Him and humans is far greater than between humans and sentient robots. Even the power distance between humans and clay jars is insufficient to depict the infinite power distance between God and humans. As mentioned in that piece, we did not create clay, nor did we create the elements (atoms) I had written that we humans are not even able to create that what clay consists of, let alone the particles thereof (molecules, atoms and quarks) and the powers between them in the quantum realm.
Back to our main point. If you do not read it carefully, you will think of a masochistic God, but the former paragraph already explained that masochism does not apply to an infinitely almighty God, there is no word for His behavior for nothing ever has been like this on Earth. If you do read it carefully, however, you will see that God has also made vessels of mercy so that He could show how great His glory is. 
In other words, God created pots to be destroyed and pots that would be left intact out of mercy. If God were only to create pots to be left intact, His mercy would have less meaning (to human understanding). It is like miracles happening every day and everywhere. This miracle would still be as great as it is, but people would not appreciate or understand how special it is. Hence God created vessels that are to be destroyed so that His glory may be known even more through His act of mercy. 
This, however, is still not what is exactly being said. We need to take an even closer look at this verse. First of all, there is a "what if" at the beginning, so it does not say that God has done this for this reason, but it is only a supposition. Second of all, what it says, is that "God endures... in order to make known... His glory". God *desires* to show His wrath. Remember that this is not a masochistic trait, for everything from God is good. His wrath is not shown on those who do not deserve it. It would be like a war hero killing soldiers and their general and dictator in his wrath, because this dictator was killing their own people, just like the American army killed [Qasem Soleimani](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Qasem_Soleimani) in Iraq in 2020. 
So God desires to show His wrath, but does not do that, because He wants to show His glory through the mercy He gives to some people. 
The fact that God is patient alone is enough to show His glory, considering how badly He wants to show His power, but He even glorifies certain people, who do not deserve it, which is all the more greater. 
So back to the "What if"-statement. What if this were God's intention? Do we have any argument then to answer back to God? No, we do not. Each of the above reasons provides sufficient argument to keep our mouths shut. 
#church/material

*24 even us whom he has called, not from the Jews only but also from the Gentiles? 25 As indeed he says in Hosea,*
*“Those who were not my people I will call ‘my people,’*
*and her who was not beloved I will call ‘beloved.’”*
*26 “And in the very place where it was said to them, ‘You are not my people,’*
*there they will be called sons of the living God.’”*

God is so merciful that some of the vessels he created for mercy are even made for people like us, the Gentiles. He will turn this world upside down and call those whom He hated, *His people*. It is like the poor becoming the rich, not the middle class becoming rich. God uses extremes, not only as examples but He actually does this to show the greatness of His power. 
The world thinks the firstborn should receive a double portion, but God has always used the young one, such as Joseph and David, to inherit the double portion and carry out God's will. He let the handsome and strong ones, like Saul and David's son ... #todo/opzoeken with the long hair perish. So it is in this world, we look up to the handsome and strong ones, the rich and powerful, but it is they who will perish. Of course, there are some exceptions of movie stars who are all of this and still live a relatively moral life, perhaps even better than we do, such as Keanu Reeves and Jay Chou (who has become a Christian now), but generally God raises the weak ones who depend on Him to depend on Him even more. 
Now why would God want to raise the weak so that they could depend on Him? Could He not have left them weak so that they would always depend on Him? The answer is that God wants them to enjoy life, but with restraints. 
A life without money or materials is not always fun, God gives us riches so that we can enjoy them, but when we enjoy them too much, we will forget about God and others and only think of ourselves. That is why God raises the poor to become rich, but they still need God's help to overcome their own problems such as emotional insecurity and a weak conscience. He raises the weak to become strong, but they still need God to maintain their strength, for just like Samson they are easily prone to all kinds of seductions, such as women, narcissism of their own body. He raises the insecure to make them mentally strong and confident, but they are still prone to (new) addictions, by replacing their old ones with other ones. Codependency in drugs, can be replaced by controlling others. 
In short, we need to realize we are weak and that we will always stay weak. We need God to show us we are so dependent of Him that without Him we can do nothing, but *with* Him we are more than conquerors! 

*27 And Isaiah cries out concerning Israel: “Though the number of the sons of Israel be as the sand of the sea, only a remnant of them will be saved, 28 for the Lord will carry out his sentence upon the earth fully and without delay.” 29 And as Isaiah predicted,*
*“If the Lord of hosts had not left us offspring,*
*we would have been like Sodom*
*and become like Gomorrah.”*

The former verses contrast this one. In the former ones it says that even the Gentiles, who were not beloved, will now be beloved—and even named as such by God—while the Israelites, who were beloved and were as many as the sea, only a remnant of them will be saved—and even this remnant is mercy of God, for if He had not given His mercy, the Jews would have been like Sodom, that is, nothing. 
If we look at what has happened to the Israelites, if the research done is correct, we see a few tribes have ended in Africa and in India. They are far from prosperous, technologically advanced or even morally advanced. It is true that God has only left a remnant, Judah, I think, and perhaps Benjamin as well, because it was located in the same area and this tribe (perhaps) was also transported to Babylon. 
That God left an offspring is not referring to ... Not only has God #todo nog af te maken, see Evernote. 

**Israel's Unbelief**
*30 What shall we say, then? That Gentiles who did not pursue righteousness have attained it, that is, a righteousness that is by faith; 31 but that Israel who pursued a law that would lead to righteousness did not succeed in reaching that law. 32 Why? Because they did not pursue it by faith, but as if it were based on works. They have stumbled over the stumbling stone, 33 as it is written,*
*“Behold, I am laying in Zion a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense;*
*and whoever believes in him will not be put to shame.”*

We see here that God (or Paul) defines two terms, *righteousness* and *righteousness by faith*. Those who try to attain righteousness without faith, will not succeed. In fact, it is exactly because of all the works they have done, that they failed, because they put their faith in those things. 
So, as was obvious from everything above, what matters is where or who you put your faith in.

Now what God has done is more than just creating a crossways where one chooses to go the path with or the path without faith, each with their respective destinations. If it were that simple, some would have gone that way and at the end of their road c.q. lives, they would have found out that they went the wrong way. But it would be too late for them to turn around by then. 
No, those who walk this path without faith are offended by those who walk the path with faith. They are angry, like one who stumbles over a rock and injures his little toe and falls flat on his face.
Why would these people care about what path others take? In the movie *The Case for Christ* Lee Strobel is also very frustrated up to the point of angry with his wife for choosing the path of Christ. Not because she is leaving him behind—because he could simply have followed her—but for some unknown reason. He does not believe that God is real, but why does he have to impose it so badly on others. 
If he wants to convince others of his religion, which is atheism, just like Christians want to convince others, that is understandable. But why would he get angry over such a thing? 
It is exactly because of this stumbling stone. Everything written in verse 33 is for those who do not believe in him, that is pain, agony and shame. 

#biblestudy/devotionals/romans