# Romans 10 (ESV) 
*1 Brothers, my heart's desire and prayer to God for them is that they may be saved. 2 For I bear them witness that they have a zeal for God, but not according to knowledge. 3 For, being ignorant of the righteousness of God, and seeking to establish their own, they did not submit to God's righteousness. 4 For Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to everyone who believes.*

Being zealous alone is not a sufficient condition for salvation. Their zeal, or their passion, is what drives them, but Paul has clearly said that we are in control of our body, in the sense that we can decide when we do something or not. Note that this does not contrast Romans 7:16 for there he is speaking of a separation between his flesh and his will. His will, however, is under his control. 
So if the Jews are zealous in converting everyone from Christianity back to Judaism, it might be their passion that is doing that, but they are ignoring their knowledge about God then. One cannot use only one aspect to justify his actions. Neither is that the case for good intentions. Someone with good intentions has to use his brains as well and think about what he is going to do or the consequences might be disastrous. 
In this case it is their will that is the problem, which is the one thing they do have fully control over. 
If they had wanted it, they would have searched for knowledge, to know who God really is. Anthony Flew #tags/famouspeople is one of those intellectuals who lacked knowledge about God. I do not know his past or how he has been influenced in becoming an atheist—although he did clearly show his indignation of God's, to him, unrighteous punishment of hell for unbelievers, which might give a hint as to the origin of his atheism and battle against God—but I have heard one of his debates with William Lane Craig. Like most professional debaters, they are—or at least try to be—intellectually consistent. Flew then had to find a way to disprove of the Kalaam argument of the latter (i.e. *everything that began to exist, must have had a cause*) and could not, so he ended up in his argument that this argument is valid only within the universe and we do not know if this argument is valid for anything outside of our universe. 
Now that may be true, but it is not the most intuitive answer and he knows that. But he is trying to go for any route he can go, as long as he does not have to admit that God exists. 
Eventually, though, through the discovery of DNA, he could not do anything but admit that there must be a God Who could create such complex and logic material within each cell of each living organism. 
The Jews are alike, not only do some not think about searching for the truth, others try to think of another way of explaining it. But those who have seen Jesus alive and fully well, in a matter of *days* after a flogging and crucifixion, have purposely deceived other Jews into believing that He did not rise and that his body was stolen. They are not only intellectually inconsistent, but also unfaithful to the truth. They care more about their view and their position than about the truth, which would lead them to God. 

**The Message of Salvation to All**
*5 For Moses writes about the righteousness that is based on the law, that the person who does the commandments shall live by them. 6 But the righteousness based on faith says, “Do not say in your heart, ‘Who will ascend into heaven?’” (that is, to bring Christ down) 7 “or ‘Who will descend into the abyss?’” (that is, to bring Christ up from the dead). 8 But what does it say? “The word is near you, in your mouth and in your heart” (that is, the word of faith that we proclaim); 9 ::because, if you confess with your mouth that Jesus is Lord and believe in your heart that God raised him from the dead, you will be saved. 10 For with the heart one believes and is justified, and with the mouth one confesses and is saved.::* #biblestudy/memorization/todo 

Moses' law said that those who do the law, will live by them. They will not merely do it, in the sense that one does it only when other people are watching, or do it merely out of obedience or fear of God. No, they do it because it is a part of their life. 
When we come to faith, however, we do them because the Word lives within us. Letting the law become a part of your life is good, but when it becomes a tradition, that is a wrong motivation as well. 
So now we do not have to get Christ down or ask Him to be with us, because we know He is already with us. When we pray and ask Him to be with us, we ask, however, that we can feel his presence. 
So the Word is in us and that it comes out of our mouth proves that was in us. That is also why it is so important that we confess with our mouths that Jesus is Lord. For one can go without the other, that is confessing with the mouth can be done without believing with the heart, but believing in the heart cannot be done without confessing with the mouth.

*11 For the Scripture says, “Everyone who believes in him will not be put to shame.”*

We have seen Christians being martyred and being bullied for their conservative views and even being called old-fashioned, bigots, homophobes and what more? So we have been put to shame for the world. But that is exactly what is important here. God wants to be proud of us, in *His* eyes that is, and then, almost by definition, the world will automatically put us to shame. Take the example of a white person in a black country, he would immediately be very noticeable and vice versa. The same it is for those in the kingdom of God or those *from* God. It would rather be a problem if you were not noticeable, for then it would mean you have become like them (when you were white) or you have never fully become white. 
So yes, you might be put to shame, but you will not be shamed in front of God, but rather in the presence of those who have wrong views, although you should not have looked up to them in the first place (cf. Romans 1:16).

*12 For there is no distinction between Jew and Greek; for the same Lord is Lord of all, bestowing his riches on all who call on him. 13 For “everyone who calls on the name of the Lord will be saved.”*

Is it really that simple? Is all one has to do call on Jesus in order to be saved? No, this verse should not be taken out of context. The verses prior already say this has to be done with the heart and the mouth, and the verses hereafter clearly indicate that belief is necessary. 

#todo voorbeeld aan KenPei. Je kunt pas gered worden als je ergens in gelooft. Zie ook het voorbeeld van het touw in de put. 
Je gelooft dat het touw er is (de mogelijkheid om gered te worden), en daarmee geloof je ook dat Jezus Degene is Die het touw heeft uitgeworpen naar je. 
Je gelooft dat Jezus het touw niet zal loslaten, want wie zou er nou een touw gaan pakken dat halverwege losgelaten wordt? Hiermee toon je aan dat je Jezus vertrouwt met ~~heel~~ je leven. Hij heeft nu de controle over je leven. (het punt over het loslaten van de dingen in je leven heeft hiermee te maken) 
Als je dan uit de put komt, zijn er geen voorwaarden meer. Er is geen voorwaarde dat je niet de put in mag springen, er is geen voorwaarde dat je Jezus om de hals moet vliegen en Hem moet bedanken. En er is ook geen voorwaarde dat je Hem moet aanbidden en prijzen. Dat je hem moet erkennen als God (niet perse jouw God, maar wel als God zijnde) is niet een voorwaarde, maar is impliciet, omdat je hebt gezien dat Hij uit de put geklommen is en jou het touw heeft toegereikt. Als je dat niet had geloofd, dan had je ook niet geloofd dat het touw echt was. #todo/familytime 
#todo nog af te maken

::*14 How then will they call on him in whom they have not believed? And how are they to believe in him of whom they have never heard? And how are they to hear without someone preaching? 15 And how are they to preach unless they are sent? As it is written, “How beautiful are the feet of those who preach the good news!”*:: #biblestudy/memorization/todo

This is a logical statement that follows from each of the pretexts. Everyone should agree with this, although some might claim they have heard through dreams or prophecies, and some preachers might not be sent but might have felt a calling. Then there are others who call on God without believing in Him. All of these pretexts are groups that exist in actuality, but who are not pure in their teachings, because they do not follow the logic in these verses. 
The first group are the nominal Christians, people raised—usually—in a Reformed, Catholic or Orthodox environment, where going to church has become a cultural thing which one does not with the heart but out of duty or simple because everyone does it. They sometimes do good, but quite often live a secular life when no one sees is. The Academy Award®-nominated movie *As it is in heaven* #tags/movies depicts such a situation of a pastor who prays at home for his sins of lust, after having had sex with his wife. It is clear that he is from a strict form of religion based on works, and though he prayed to God in this scene, which is calling on God, he does not believe in Him or know Him like the Bible represents Him. 
The second group are people who have heard of God in the broadest sense of the word, like Muhammad has heard of Jewish, Christian and apocryphal stories and put them in the Quran, or even like Muslims of all ages who have not read the Quran—or even worse, who do not understand Arabic nor what is being said and explained in mosques—and only hear things *about* Allah #tags/religion. Another group that clarifies the example is a lost group of one the twelve tribes of Israel, Dan. It has been researched that in Africa there is a tribe with Jewish DNA, customs and words in their language of which they do not know where these come from or why they do it. They are animists as well, which means they worship nature, in the way God should be worshipped according to the Old Testament. Because they have never heard of God, their whole worship is erroneous. #todo/opzoeken/engels faulty, beter woord voor bedenken. #todo nog af te maken
The third group is closer to God and His Word. This group has seen God and they know who He is. The people here are for example often former Muslims, for in Muslim countries God often uses dreams, perhaps because Muslims believe in the power of dreams or because in Muslim countries it is not allowed to spread the Gospel. 
In China as well there have been cases like this where not only the spread of the Gospel and the physical Bible was prohibited, but teaching was very limited as well. People like Brother Yun from the book "*The Heavenly Man*" #tags/books and Watchman Nee have had teachings from God, not in the way Paul had, but God spoke to them very clearly and they both had a lack of godly teachers so—I assume—they had to extrapolate their knowledge from what was in the Bible (or what they had memorized thereof) and what God had given them. This of course is not completely done without speculation or inserting things, for which we cannot fully blame them, but the ultimate conclusion is that their teachings might not be completely sound. 
Now it is a fact that no teacher has a flawless theology nor does anyone have no opposition #todo/opzoeken/engels tegenstanders .—not even Derek Prince, apart from his Pentecostal views, would have all non-liberal theologians on his side. But Watchman Nee's teachings are, as far as I know, mainly out of existence. I have never heard anyone speaking about the teachings in his book *The Normal Christian Life* #tags/books in the last three decades. #todo/opzoeken in hoeverre is zijn leer nog populair, geldig en wat is zijn leer eigenlijk? 
Now the fourth group might have all of the former except for the calling to preach. It is like Martin Lloyd-Jones explained in his book *Preaching and Preachers* #tags/books about a preacher who did not feel the calling and no matter how great his sermons, he did not feel the need for it. #todo/opzoeken Waar? 
Now there are also a great number of fake preachers who most definitely have not received God's calling to preach, but they would not even meet the former criteria, so we will leave those aside. 
Or perhaps put otherwise, I cannot think of an actual example though, but a preacher who is not called by God will not see the fruit of the Holy Spirit.  

Now those who actually preach the good news, even their ugliest part, their feet, are considered as beautiful when the news they bring is good. Of such greatness is the message that it makes all things beautiful. Indeed, it is the Gospel of Jesus Christ that makes preachers like Paul, who were most likely of an unattractive stature, just like Jesus Himself according to Isaiah 52:14 and 53:2-3—although that could also be referring to His appearance after He was flogged. Read this [article](http://www.bergsland.org/2011/06/recentposts/how-ugly-was-jesus/) for more information about this. 

*16 But they have not all obeyed the gospel. For Isaiah says, “Lord, who has believed what he has heard from us?”*

###### Belief and faith
Now if all requirements are met, and Paul's quote from Isaiah 52:7 in verse 15 is speaking of someone who is sent (because the messenger's feet and shoes usually are worn out due to all the traveling) and who preaches the Good News or in other words, the Gospel (cf. [Isaiah 52 (ESV) - The feet of the messenger](bear://x-callback-url/open-note?id=60E171AB-2DA4-4884-A229-0B9E3EE2544A-48930-00019AFB1C102754&header=The%20feet%20of%20the%20messenger)) then still there is a chance that people do not *believe* what is being said. 
Note that Paul does not make a distinction between obedience and faith. He puts a direct correlation between the in verse 16 like this: "they have not ... obeyed ... [for] ... who has believed...?". So anyone who believes will obey. 
As we know, belief in Christianity does not mean only to believe in something that one has not seen before as in Hebrews 11:1, but what this verse means, is that it is not seen by the eye. For Moses has seen God, albeit not God Himself, for no man can see Him and stay alive, so can we say then that Moses did not have faith? Abraham clearly heard God and Isaiah saw Him in a vision, can we say both of them did not believe? Of course not. They believed the promise God gave them without the promise actually being there. We even have the Holy Spirit as a deposit #todo/opzoeken  waar? 
, we have hundreds if not thousands of documented miracles in hospitals, but also in the form of eye testimonies all across the world, let alone in our own churches; we have thousands or arguments and proofs for the veracity and historicity of Jesus and His claims and still our belief is counted as faith for the very reason that we did not see Jesus nor His promise with our eyes. 
When something is seen with the eye or—in Thomas' case—felt by touch, it is not faith anymore. Thomas did not merely believe Jesus was raised from the dead now, he *knew* it. We cannot know in the sense like Thomas did, but we believe it according to the definition of Hebrews 11:1. 

*17 So faith comes from hearing, and hearing through the word of Christ.*

The verses above and below are a logical deduction of what we see in the world. Obedience should follow from faith, and faith comes from hearing and have heard His Word. Could it be that some have not? No, that is not possible, because God has said that his Word has reached the end. 
But what about those who have never opened the Bible then? Note that this is not the same question as the one posed in Romans 1-3. This is about who has *heard* the word of Christ, not who has *read* it. 

*18 But I ask, have they not heard? Indeed they have, for*
*“Their voice has gone out to all the earth,*
*and their words to the ends of the world.”*
*19 But I ask, did Israel not understand? First Moses says,*
*“I will make you jealous of those who are not a nation;*
*with a foolish nation I will make you angry.”*

So can we say then that Israel has an excuse because they did not understand? We know that many people in Jesus' time could not read and only had the scribes' and their interpretation as their source of Biblical truth and the  #todo/opzoeken/engels overleveringen, zoals Hadith. 
Paul, however, does not even answer this question in verse 19 and simply continues to the next lines quoted from Deuteronomy 32:21 about Israel's punishment. 
Has it come true by this time? Right now, most certainly, we can say that Israelis jealous of other countries that have sovereignty, while Israel, which has one of the oldest documented civilizations and the right to their land, is almost unanimously being expelled from her own country, reprimanded by the same countries in the United Nations for doing what is normal in the situation of attacks from neighboring countries, and even being told which city should be the capital. President Trump was even being #todo/opzoeken/engels slandered? niet onder druk gezet, maar negatief in het nieuws gezet, 
for moving the American embassy from Tel Aviv to its rightful place, Jerusalem, which is in itself not only legal but also the rightful thing to do because of the sovereignty of a nation. 
Now those who are not even a nation, such as Palestine, which is a group of territories spread all over Israel and the Gaza strip, with people in and outside of the settlements. 
Perhaps Israel does not actually feel jealous, but I can imagine that she is. The Palestinians do not have a country, do everything they can to incite Israel such as attacking first, hiding Hezbollah within their people and sacrificing innocent people and children in hospitals by putting them in the locations they knew was going to be bombed, they put martyrs with bomb vests in city centers to bring people down to hell—and still, the world cheers them on as if they are the heroes and they reprimand Israel for starting the fights. Some jealousy might be at play (from Israel's side).

The last line about the foolish nation could have been about Palestine, which is utterly foolish. They have the best technology and most peace-loving country right next to them or literally *around* them (Palestine consists of pieces of area within and next to Israel). They are taunting one of the most advanced military and economic powers #todo/opzoeken/engels grootmachten
right next to them, without any country in between to protect them. If Egypt were to help them from being slaughtered by the Israelis, Egypt would never make it in time. 
What more is foolish about this country? There is too much to say. 

But even if these verses are not about Palestine—and there are more nations who are not actual nations and are foolish and are all better off than Israel—the geste of the verses is still true. God punishes Israel for her deeds, for her atrocities with other gods and her ungratefulness towards God Himself, by not only prostituting herself with idols and child sacrifices, but also by willingly declining God's help at the point of near destruction by an enemy country, and still hoping that either another country would partner with them or that they could bribe the oncoming enemy. 

*20 Then Isaiah is so bold as to say,*
*“I have been found by those who did not seek me;*
*I have shown myself to those who did not ask for me.”*
*21 But of Israel he says, “All day long I have held out my hands to a disobedient and contrary people.”*

Boldness surely was needed for Isaiah. For a prophet of God for His people to say about them that God did not want them anymore, some would expect humiliation, that people kneel down out of fear of being left by God, such as the Ninevites did. But the Israelites hardened their hearts even more and eventually killed Isaiah. 
On top of that Isaiah even says that God has now found other peoples, those who did not even seek God. Now this was for the Israelites utter blasphemy—although I do not understand the fuss, for they did not want this God anyway—the fact that an unclean nation would rob them of their inheritance given by Abraham and Moses. 
The Israelites were proud and stubborn. There was something they did not want, but they did not want anyone else to get their hands on either. What is the logic in this? They knew their lineage, it was from Abraham, everyone acknowledged that, I suppose. They wanted all the blessings God wanted to give them of a fruitful land and eternal life, and a ruler—the Messiah—but they did not want to give up everything earthly in order to gain what is heavenly. They wanted both, as so many Christians do these days. 

Now, who are those nations who did not seek for God and how could they have found God when they were not seeking Him? I know the Chinese used to believe in a god of whom they only knew he was the highest (in Chinese *shàng dì* or 上帝), perhaps they knew about Him from the descendants of Noah after the fall of the tower of Babel. They forgot about Who *shàng dì* actually was and worship was limited. So the Chinese were not actually seeking Him in worship, because they already sort of knew Him. 
God, however, showed Himself to them through another way. First through the way of astrologers who discovered the first star that indicated Jesus birth, the star of Bethlehem, that stayed at the sky for an approximate 70 days, and afterwards they saw the second star that guided them to Bethlehem which took them two years so that by that time Jesus was already a toddler. 
#todo/opzoeken reizigers deden er een paar maanden over om bij Herodes te komen, maar Herodes kwam er na twee jaar achter dat de wijzen nog niet terug waren? Bleef Jozef dan in Bethlehem wonen en waarom? 
Afterwards, in the 19th century, God showed Himself again to the Chinese through a series of missionaries, not beginning with Hudson Taylor #tags/famouspeople but bringing about a great deal of new missionaries after him, through his books and the adventures, if you will, described in it. 
Later, when the missionaries fled or were killed before, during and after the Boxer's revolution, the number of missionaries decreased drastically, but the number of Chinese missionaries grew intensely, either in prison or in underground churches, up until today. 
Another one of those examples is India, who, however, has never been seeking God in any way. In hindsight they might have retrofitted Jesus and Buddha as one of the reincarnations of one of their gods, but it was never anything they were seeking nor following, i.e. obeying the rules of. Here too God worked through missionaries to bring about the greatest revival in history, together with China, that is still ongoing, with more radical Christians than there are in the West! 
In the United States 30 percent of Americans claim they are Christian, but usually only half of those actually are Christian and only a tenth of this 30 percent, is radical, which makes about 8 million people—the number of Christians willing to die for their faith—much less than the number of Christians in India or China. 

#biblestudy/devotionals/romans #tags/events/pentecost