# Romans 5 (ESV) 
**Peace with God Through Faith**
*1 Therefore, since we have been justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ. 2 Through him we have also obtained access by faith into this grace in which we stand, and we rejoice in hope of the glory of God.* 

There are two things that we have been given by Jesus Christ which lead to two outcomes.
1. We have been justified and therefore we have peace with God. 
2. We have access to His grace and therefore we rejoice and have hope. 

Note that the first outcome only speaks of peace *with God*—which is an external, objective reality (see notes in *MacSBNnkjv*)—it does not say peace *of heart*, which is a subjective, internal sense of calm and serenity. We can be sure now that God is not angry with us, as we have been justified (the first point), but do we have peace with our own sins of the past and our current ones? Do we have peace with who we are, what we are able to do and what we are worth? Do we have peace with our circumstances, whether rich or poor (cf. Philippians 4:11-13)?
This first part is very important and it is actually all that matters if we want to access heaven and be with God eternally. One needs *access* and access is only given to those who have been judged as not guilty. Through this justification, by *faith* in Jesus Christ, who has paid the full ransom for us, we have now been declared sinless at the Day of Judgment (note that the "have been" here refers to a past tense, although the Day of Judgment is in the future. This logical fallacy does not apply though for God.) So even though we are not in heaven with the Father right now, we know that we will be. Jesus is accumulating all of our sins right now up to the day we die. He already has paid for it on the cross, but on that day he will deduct it from the price He has already paid at the cross. 
Even if we do not have peace at heart, we have peace with God. Our lack of peace at heart comes from the fact that we have not fully changed yet. Our bodies and soul have not been made new yet, but the Holy Spirit lives in us and cleanses it as He works. God is willing to put His Spirit in an unclean body like ours, because He knows that this body is one that will be cleansed at the end of ages. So we have more peace than before we came to Christ, but still we are not fully peaceful. This leads us to the second part. 
We have access to God's grace. Jesus Christ has paid the price in full, and He could give us all that He has promised us when we go to heaven. But He did not. He is giving it to us right now. He is carrying the burden with us and lightening our load. He has already forgiven us and taken the shame from us. This is one reason why we can rejoice. Through His grace we have received the Holy Spirit in *advance*, He was sent to us as a bond, as bail or a deposit or a security #todo/opzoeken/engels borg. God's promise should suffice, but He has given us certainty in our faith and also shows this through the many miracles and powers and wisdom we get from the Holy Spirit. 
Now this gives us hope as well. We could live a whole life resting on the promise of God, but never seeing any of this. We could never see it from anyone, except from those who returned from the dead, which are but a handful. But now there is no need for this, for God has sent His Holy Spirit to tell us directly what He is saying to us. 

::*3 Not only that, but we rejoice in our sufferings, knowing that suffering produces endurance, 4 and endurance produces character, and character produces hope, 5 and hope does not put us to shame, because God's love has been poured into our hearts through the Holy Spirit who has been given to us.*:: #biblestudy/memorization

What God is saying, He is saying most clearly in our sufferings. As the above verses explain the meaning of suffering and how we can rejoice in it, it ultimately leads to hope. *With* hope suffering is much more easily to endure and after having endured it, suffering provides hope to see that the suffering has an end. 
The first parts described in verses 3 and 4 I will skip for now, because they seem rather logical and consequential. Verse 5, however, describes a strange consequence, namely that "hope does not put us to shame, because God's love has been poured into our hearts". What does that mean? 
Being put to shame means that we are ashamed of something because something does not come. Suppose a father promised his young child that he will come back, or even specify the time and says that he will be back before his birthday, and after a while the father still does not appear, then this boy will be put to shame by his friends or opponents laughing not so much at him but rather at his (lousy) father. However, if he has love for the father, then in that love there is trust, and the boy will not be ashamed, because he trusts his father to have said the truth. 
Now if this is heavenly love given to us through the Holy Spirit, then this trust and hope is stronger than human love. 

#todo/nogaftemaken  waarom "for" hier? Zie de vorige zin. 

See also notes on 2 Corinthians 1:4-7.

*6 For while we were still weak, at the right time Christ died for the ungodly.*

God always has the right timing. We see this clearly depicted in Jesus' life, how He meets people at the right time, heals them eats with them. It is all fitting and part of His three (and a half)-year ministry to do all of it as efficient as possible. He even knew the devil would stop Him but that did not stop Jesus from sticking to His plan. His plan has been made, purposed, and it will stand (cf. Isaiah 14:24).
We might be wondering, however, why the year of approximately 35 AD was the right time for Christ to die. There are many things that can be said about it. If Jesus had been born later, He would have been born under another Herod, who would not have been so cruel to kill all boys under two years of age. This was to fulfill what was foretold by the prophets. #todo/opzoeken rama? where? 
Other reasons were the spread of the Gospel. If Jesus were to have died later, the Gospel would not have had enough time to flourish and the extinction by the Jews, Romans in and outside of Israel, and the Jewish War, which most likely also killed a lot of Christians, must have led to another outcome. 
If Jesus died sooner then He most likely would have been born sooner as well, assuming He must start His ministry at age 30 and must fulfill a period of three years of discipling in order to teach His disciples well—this in itself is also an explanation. If Jesus had died later, He would have spent more than three years with His disciples, which would have been unnecessary (even though there is always more to be learned from Jesus) because His disciples would have received all the knowledge they need to continue their way. 
If Jesus had been born sooner, then His parents, Joseph and Mary, would have had to stay for a longer period in Egypt to wait until Herod had died, which would not have been God's preference (is my guess) as God did not want His people to ever go back to Egypt. 
If Jesus had been born before Herod the Great's rise to kingship then the temple would not have been built and Jesus would not have been able to be blessed there.

Now this statement in verse 6 is probably only about God's perfect timing for all of the above-mentioned reasons, although these are reasons (I think) that God chose this time but it is also because humanity could not live longer without the coming of Jesus. 
We see throughout history that the Israelites started to abandon God in Egypt after a certain period, which was 400 years, by worshipping idols. The fact they did that in the desert most likely means they were doing that in Egypt as well. 
God wanted them punished, but not for too long, so He brought the Jews into exile in Babylon, but there, as well, not for too long or they would follow the gods of Babylon and Persia. 
Now, back in Israel, God refrain from any contact with the Jews, but here too He could not wait too long, for after 400 years—though the Jews were not worshipping idols in the literal sense—the Jews started to worship their own kind of idols, such as the Law (through legalism) and Pharisees, scribes and priests started their own kingdoms and cults, having both money and power, and clashes began to occur between the four different sects of the Pharisees, Sadducees, Zealots and Essenes. 
I am not sure if this was also one of the country's lowest points in their economy with a great division between the rich and the poor, but from what can be read in the New Testament poverty seemed to be present everywhere. 

*7 For one will scarcely die for a righteous person—though perhaps for a good person one would dare even to die— 8 but God shows his love for us in that while we were still sinners, Christ died for us. 9 Since, therefore, we have now been justified by his blood, much more shall we be saved by him from the wrath of God.*

A      version of the part above is: "*God shows His love for us by dying for sinners.* People are selfish and they show that through the sacrifices. Scarcely would one give up his life for other, but if one does it, it is (usually) for good people. 
I have heard this story from Francis Chan about one of his (?) congregation members who donated his kidney to a stranger—a man whom he's only just met. Now that is a very heroic and rare, but still, no matter how good he is, he—most likely—gave this kidney because he liked the person, perhaps because the person was a good man as well and because he had a family. I presuppose there is something emotional behind it. I do not suppose it is to convert him—even though he was converted by this act of love—because that would not be a sustainable method, however, I do think that this man's story touched the donator. Perhaps it was about how sad his life was, or how he could not provide for his family or find a suitable job having only one kidney and needing constant dialyses in the hospital. 
So this person was touched, and his conscience and emotions spoke to him. However, what God has done is far greater than this. He gave His life to someone who disliked Him and literally nailed Him on the cross. 

*10 For if while we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more, now that we are reconciled, shall we be saved by his life.*

The logic used here is superlative reasoning #todo/opzoeken wat is de echte term hiervoor? 
If God treats his enemies with method *A* and He treats His loved ones with method *B*, then *B* must be better than *A* given the assumptions about God and logic reasoning. 
So God is willing to give His own Son's life for His enemies, then what would He be willing to do for those who are reconciled with Him? 
The logic used here is not perfect, because it implies two (consecutive) gifts. If God were to give only one gift to each person then the enemy of God would receive reconciliation, and the friend of God (for whom no reconciliation is needed) would receive salvation. One cannot use the argument that everyone will salvation because the enemy first receives reconciliation and because he is reconciled with God he receives salvation as well. That would only apply if God were to give two gifts. 
However, Paul is implicitly stating that the gift of Jesus, which is His life, is big enough to provide both reconciliation and salvation. #todo nog af te maken
Jesus' gift reconciles us with God and make us His children, and because we are His children, we are now under His protection. It is like buying Roman citizenship. You pay one price to get it (even though it is not legally obtainable but only through corruption) but obtaining this status is not enough, one needs also the benefits of it, and that is what one gets when paying this price. 
Now obtaining reconciliation with God is a good thing in and of itself, but what comes with that is direct communication with Jesus Christ and therefore with God, direct contact with God through the Holy Spirit in order to receive all of God's attributes such as His peace and love and comfort. 

*11 More than that, we also rejoice in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we have now received reconciliation.*

One thing I have not mentioned in the last line above is joy. Joy is one of the foremost traits of being a Christian and what convinces others to become one. I am not sure if it seeing others being so joyful and then wanting to become one, or whether it is that one feels the joy of Christian momentarily and then decides to want this all of his life. I think it is rather the former or otherwise a shout out to God that one cannot live without Him anymore, and that upon that joy descends on you, heavenly peace that goes above one's mind. 
This joy is what the Holy Spirit gives us. We do not only get this from the hope we have in Christ—that is, everything that happens to us, all of the negative things, we now see in the light of God's plan. So if we break a leg or lose our jobs or even a friend or family member, we know that God allowed it for His good purpose, so that we may be shaped. Remember, suffering produces endurance and endurance produces character. So in this we can rejoice and know that our suffering was not for nothing and actually it was for our own good, to be shaped, but more importantly, to fulfill God's plan. 
But there is another reason to rejoice, and that is because we are at a party now and the groom is in our midst.
There is not reason to be more rejoicing than otherwise, but it just is. Having the groom in your circle simply is an honor. There is not much to say about that.

Now when we have Jesus Christ through the Holy Spirit in our lives, we are not alone, we have someone to talk to. We have an important person by our side Whom we are proud of, in Whom we find our identity. It is like a son who is proud to see his father at his performance or at his sports game.
We know Jesus and the Father see everything we do and they are proud of us no matter the results, but are looking only at our hearts.

**Death in Adam, Life in Christ**
*12 Therefore, just as sin came into the world through one man, and death through sin, and so death spread to all men because all sinned—* 

One man only sinned, and with it, though unbeknownst, except through his nakedness, he started dying. So there was a mental change (he knew he was naked), an emotional change (he was afraid), a physical change (his cells started dying) and a spiritual change (he no longer had contact with God). I am not sure if God's Holy Spirit was ever in Adam, but it certainly was not after his sin. 
Now quite logically every person to be born from Adam from that time on would at least have physical failures, because of Adam's imperfection in his DNA, which may be coupled with this mental state, since the mind is based on the brains which are in turn based on DNA. So that could be explained away with by a change in DNA that God caused as a consequence for eating this fruit.
The fact that this newborn child had never seen or experienced the full version of God, but only heard a part of it, made it such that the child would not have a perfect understanding or relationship with God. In the case of a perfect relationship with God, the person' emotional state should be perfect. There would be love and where there is love, there is no fear. There would be no jealousy or denial or anything that leads up to the destruction of our lives. 
However, what would happen with a person had he been created next to Adam and Eve, or a person born from them before the Fall? Would this person be exposed to sin and would he fall for it? Would death be spread to him as well? 
The situation would be exceptional. Unlike an innocent child in class among sinful children, where this innocent child would learn bad things and be hurt in the process, Adam was a fully grown man and knew what was bad and he would never be bullied or become sad. What I mean to say by this, is that some people start into bad habits as a result of being excluded from a group, and in order to belong to a group they start picking up these habits. This would not be this third person's case. He (or she) would not bullied by Adam and get hurt, because he would not know these feelings in a perfect world. 
However, Adam might have been able to seduce this person, just like the Satan was able to seduce Adam. So the answer is, yes, if there is only person in a group of no sinners, he will cause others to sin. God would have removed Adam and Eve from this third person in order to make sure that this third person stayed holy. But death would not spread as if it were an airborne contagious disease. 

*13 for sin indeed was in the world before the law was given, but sin is not counted where there is no law.*

~~This is a clear statement of the difference between sin and transgression or trespass. Note that it says that sin is not counted towards our figurative book which all records of all transgressions are kept.~~ However, the *natural* consequences of these transgressions are present. If one person hits another, even unknowingly or not on purpose, he might get a slap back. God did not order (or conduct) this other guy to slap him back. It is like hitting a ball against a wall, at one time it will come back at you. That is just a law of natural physics. 
So death is a natural consequence of our transgressions. I am not sure how to explain this. If Adam's cells were multiplying without any cell dying out before it was replaced by another or getting a shorter lifespan (i.e. the telomere #todo/opzoeken/engels decreases), why would a transgression lead to Adam's cells suddenly do dying out? 
The answer lies in the fact that the above description is wrong. Verse 13 says "*sin* is not counted", but I misread it as "transgression is not counted". 
So what does verse 13 then mean? It means that sin was present because people knew in their hearts what was wrong. The fact that it says it is not counted, does not mean it is not counted towards your record of sins, because we already know from Romans 3 that God judges according to a person's knowledge of the Law, both the written law as well as the law in one's heart. What this verse then does mean, we can see in verse 14. It says there that this sin, though not counted, still resulted in death. 

*14 Yet death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over those whose sinning was not like the transgression of Adam, who was a type of the one who was to come.* #biblestudy/theology/typology

This part makes it clear that no matter what size the sin is, death will always be the result, even if the sin was not a great one as that of Adam. On one hand Adam's sin was the greatest of all, it is that sin that defied God's direct commandment, which was clear than any other commandment ever given to anyone in history—even clearer than the Ten Commandments that have been given to Moses on mount Carmel #todo/opzoeken deze berg? 
given over a period of forty day, even though the Ten Commandments and all the laws that follow after Exodus 20 would not take forty days to read. Perhaps God had repeated his laws many times over due to its importance until Moses had memorized them verse by verse, or perhaps God had told him many other instructions. But even then, the instruction were not as clear as those received by Adam, because God was hidden in a cloud or in some other form—and Adam's instructions could not have been any simpler: do not eat from the fruit of this tree. 
We know from this book of Romans that God judges according to one's understanding of the Law. In many of the law given to Moses there would be an understanding of less than a hundred percent. Even murder and theft could be in a grey area, when you look at what happens during a war. But the law given to Adam was perfectly understandable. There was no situation of hunger or other need to take the fruit. There was only a desire to become like God. 
On the other hand, Adam's sin seemed small, just the eating of one thing that was not allowed. We know, however, that it is not always the act that God detests, but rather the intention with which it is done. The Sabbath as well requires rest, but when the intention is to save people, God forgoes the sin. 
Either way, any sin, no matter how big or small, will lead to death. 

*15 But the free gift is not like the trespass. For if many died through one man's trespass, much more have the grace of God and the free gift by the grace of that one man Jesus Christ abounded for many.*

The free gift God has given us is not like the sin of Adam, because it does not entail that once the free gift had been distributed *everyone* would fall under it, like during the first trespass of Adam and Eve when the whole of humanity fell under sin. 
There are a few points, however, that changed for all humanity after Christ rose up from the cross. People now are able to have the Holy Spirit and therefore have the certainty that they will go to heaven. They will thus have the Holy Spirit as long as they live, whereas they would not have this in the Old Testament. The Holy Spirit is a warranty #todo/opzoeken/engels for us of eternal life, but also a way for us to have direct contact with God and obtain His wisdom, strength and the power to do miracles. These points, however, are only applicable for mankind when they choose to follow God. Before Christ's resurrection they were not available to anyone. 
So the difference is that where Adam causes everyone to fall under his sin and we had no choice in that, Jesus' sacrifice is *available* to everyone, but only when they choose for it. In other words, sin has taken our freedom away from us and we have no choice but to sin, but under Christ's law we *have* the right to *choose* again. 

*16 And the free gift is not like the result of that one man's sin. For the judgment following one trespass brought condemnation, but the free gift following many trespasses brought justification.*

We now come to a few difficult verses that require complex reasoning in order to understand them. Paul is explaining the difference between judgment without and with the free gift. Though this verse is not literally written in this way, it seems like in the former case, a single trespass brings a whole lot of condemnation. Only one trespass is enough to condemn you for the rest of your life here on Earth and in the afterlife. 
On the other hand, the free gift is so powerful that even after many trespasses it can give you the one thing you need, justification. One could conclude from that the free gift of God's grace is much more powerful than condemnation, because it covers multiple condemnations. 
If each trespass let you sit ten years in prison, then ten trespasses would condemn to prison for a hundred years. A single justification, however, would #todo/opzoeken/engels opliften all of the incarceration #todo/opzoeken/engels correct? . 

*17 For if, because of one man's trespass, death reigned through that one man, much more will those who receive the abundance of grace and the free gift of righteousness reign in life through the one man Jesus Christ.*

Here too, we must look at the effect of one man's trespass. The effect of one trespass by one man is death reigning not only *over* that one man, but *through* that man. This death spreads itself through his thoughts and actions, first and foremost to his family—if he has one—and then to his friends. We see this in influential people such as Charles Manson, Ted Bundy and David Koresh who stirred up people into cults, spreading lies about himself and in the latter case about the Bible as well, so that others do what they want. 
This effect spreads itself unendingly. Everyone born in such an environment is almost doomed to accustom to these perverse thoughts. So are we, in this world, where even a "normal" situation is completely sinful in the eyes of God. 
Now for every man who in and through whom death reigns, which is *every* man, Jesus must provide His grace in to justify the person so that he will not live under the Law anymore. We know that it is much harder to build up than to break down. This is universal law. Building up an object with Lego® pieces is much more difficult than breaking it down. 
Jesus' gift is sufficient for every man. His gift is worth more than whatever death destroys in a person's life. Now does death or Jesus' gift reign more? Of course it is Jesus' gift. And as many lives death can destroy, so many lives Jesus can not only restore, but also give meaning and true fulfillment.

*18 Therefore, as one trespass led to condemnation for all men, so one act of righteousness leads to justification and life for all men. 19 For as by the one man's disobedience the many were made sinners, so by the one man's obedience the many will be made righteous. 20 Now the law came in to increase the trespass, but where sin increased, grace abounded all the more, 21 so that, as sin reigned in death, grace also might reign through righteousness leading to eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.*

Verse 20 explains that when God says that He forgives *all* sin the scope of His forgiveness is limited to the sin committed, for one cannot forgive more than the sin that has been committed—although the current amount of sin present in this world still is a great deal when one realized how much it is. Sin existed *before* the Law, as we have read above, through sinning against our conscience, but after the Law came, it became clear to everyone who knew the Law what sin was, and now every trespass committed against the conscience *as well as* the Law were counted as sin. This means that God's forgiveness is ever increasing along with every sin committed. 
But there is a *hina*-clause, translated in English by the words "so that". That is, the next line answers the question why grace abounds all the more. Let us first analyze that verse. 
Sin reigns *in* death, but grace reigns *through* righteousness. What does *in* mean? Does it mean that in the world of the dead, it is sin that reigns? Almost. This world on Earth contains both spiritually dead and living people. One could say the more royal blood one has, the more right he has to ascend the throne. The more money one has, the more power. As for the spiritual realm: the more sin, the more reign—in the world of the spiritually dead. 
When one has bad friends, he will reign if his badness exceeds that of his peers. He would be deemed more courageous and that is what it is about. 
God, however, wants grace to reign in the realm of the spiritually living people. The second part of this verse is more difficult to understand. Indeed, it is grace that reigns, but grace cannot reign without righteousness. It is like (a president) pardoning a person who has not been indicted or is not incarcerated. Grace comes after righteousness, after God's righteousness concludes that we are guilty. That is why grace reigns *through* righteousness and this freedom that grace gives us, leads to eternal life—again—*through* Jesus Christ, for eternal life as well cannot be obtained without Jesus Christ. 


#biblestudy/devotionals/romans

