# Romans 7 (ESV) 
***Released from the Law***
*1 Or do you not know, brothers—for I am speaking to those who know the law—that the law is binding on a person only as long as he lives? 2 For a married woman is bound by law to her husband while he lives, but if her husband dies she is released from the law of marriage. 3 ::Accordingly, she will be called an adulteress if she lives with another man while her husband is alive.::* #biblestudy/apologetics/divorce *But if her husband dies, she is free from that law, and if she marries another man she is not an adulteress.*
*4 Likewise, my brothers, you also have died to the law through the body of Christ, so that you may belong to another, to him who has been raised from the dead, in order that we may bear fruit for God. 5 For while we were living in the flesh, our sinful passions, aroused by the law, were at work in our members to bear fruit for death. 6 But now we are released from the law, having died to that which held us captive, so that we serve in the new way of the Spirit and not in the old way of the written code.*

This is a beautiful example of how we pass from one world into another, where the second world has different rules and a different purpose.
Everything we lived for in the realm of the dead was meant for death. None of the things we did, not even the good things, would be used for life after death, because eternal life is only for those living in the realm of the living. The dead will take their accomplishments with them to hell. 
Also, all fruit born in the realm of the dead is for death, that means even the children born. As pitiful as it may sound, these children are raised up for death by parents who do not know any better. But fortunately all of them still get the chance to repent and convert. 

Since we have now died in the realm of the dead, does the Law then still apply to us? Yes and no. The Law of God is something absolute, it is good, whether in the realm of the living or dead, or in heaven or in hell. What Paul says is just that it does not *apply* anymore to the dead. "Apply" in what sense? Does this mean we can do everything we want? Also here the answer is yes and no. 
For those who have physically died there is no marriage, so adultery does not apply to them, in the same that rules concerning marriage only apply to human beings, not to spirits or animals. 
Now we still have a human body, but our spirits have been renewed. So to answer the first question, the law does to us because we still have a body, however, it does not apply to us in the sense that we do not get the punishment anymore, but Jesus Christ does. As for the second question, we *can* do everything we want, but Christians do not want Jesus Christ to be punished and so we do not want to do everything outside of the law. Note that we do not only want to obey because we *fear* of Jesus Christ's punishment, but it is *actually* something we do not want. It is like hurting your own body, as we are part of Jesus Christ's body. Nobody wants to hurt his own body. It is not like we actually do want to hurt our own body, but we are afraid of pain. In the same way, we see Jesus Christ as part of our body, as the head, and we want to obey him. 
As a further answer to this question, as mentioned before, we *want* to obey God and do good, we *want* to stop sinning, but we cannot, because our flesh is weak. 

**The Law and Sin**
*7 What then shall we say? That the law is sin? By no means! Yet if it had not been for the law, I would not have known sin. For I would not have known what it is to covet if the law had not said, “You shall not covet.” 8 But sin, seizing an opportunity through the commandment, produced in me all kinds of covetousness. For apart from the law, sin lies dead. 9 I was once alive apart from the law, but when the commandment came, sin came alive and I died. 10 The very commandment that promised life proved to be death to me. 11 For sin, seizing an opportunity through the commandment, deceived me and through it killed me. 12 So the law is holy, and the commandment is holy and righteous and good.*

"Sin itself seized the opportunity through the command." Sin itself is not a living thing, able to think for itself. 
This means that as soon as God created something good and holy, such as the law, sin came into existing, defined by everything that is outside of the law. 
Now that is about sin itself, but how about sin in us? It is true that humans long to do which they may not do, just like the curiosity of children is aroused when you tell them not to look in a certain cupboard. Yet how would this *produce* all kinds of covetousness? That could only be the case when sin already was present in Paul. 
Coveting was something that Paul already was guilty of, but before he knew of this law he did not *know* it was wrong. He knew what it was, that is the desiring of something that does not belong to you, but what it really meant, what impact it had, that it means you will sin towards God, that he did not know. 
Was sin always existing then in us even before the law? I thought it was. I thought that transgression was present, but that it was counted as sin. However, of course man's lust for sin has always been present and sin itself—not through the written law of Moses, but through the law of the heart—was present as well. How can Paul then say that apart from the law, sin lies dead? How can he say that he was once alive? 
First of all, Paul never lived before the law, so he is not talking about the Law of Moses coming into existence. 
Paul could be talking talking about the moment he learned about the Law of Moses or about the law written on our hearts. He would have learned about the written Law most likely on his fifth, and realize what sin actually meant, perhaps on his seventh. According to a psychologist children are not capable of purposely lying before the age of around seven. Before that it is something they know about but do not realize what they are doing. 
So in that case, Paul was literally alive before the Law and just like children, who are to die at a young age, will go to heaven, before they realize they have sinned.
 Is that, however, really what he means here? #todo nog af te maken #todo/opzoeken  in *MacSBNnkjv* 
Paul could have meant that he thought he was alive through the Law, because he hold it. However, once he realized that he did not hold by it at all to Jesus' standards, he realized he doomed for death. That, however, is not what I think this part means. 

*13 Did that which is good, then, bring death to me? By no means! It was sin, producing death in me through what is good, in order that sin might be shown to be sin, and through the commandment might become sinful beyond measure. 14 For we know that the law is spiritual, but I am of the flesh, sold under sin. 15 ::For I do not understand my own actions. For I do not do what I want, but I do the very thing I hate. 16 Now if I do what I do not want, I agree with the law, that it is good. 17 So now it is no longer I who do it, but sin that dwells within me. 18 For I know that nothing good dwells in me, that is, in my flesh. For I have the desire to do what is right, but not the ability to carry it out. 19 For I do not do the good I want, but the evil I do not want is what I keep on doing. 20 Now if I do what I do not want, it is no longer I who do it, but sin that dwells within me.*:: #biblestudy/memorization

God had to take this measure of creating the commandment so that sin might show itself. Paul phrases this as "in order that sin might be shown to be sin". Here the first "sin" refers to sin itself which is not known to people to be sin. Therefore many people engage in it, for they lust after it, without knowing that it is wrong. 
It is like the period in China when opium was used when the Chinese did not know it was bad for one's health. People kept on using it because it felt so good. The law, however, made clear that opium was a sin (or in other words, so that opium might be shown to be sin) and made an end to the use of it, but arresting people for the possession and use of it. 
This does not prevent us from *liking* opium or in this case, sin. We still live in our bodies made of flesh, and sin is on the same "level" as our bodies. Our bodies long for this sin. 
The law, which is spiritual, is put above the flesh. One needs to rise from the flesh and all of its dependencies and longings, in order to enter the spiritual. It is like animals who only like food, but who will never be interested in a god. Even the anthropomorphic animals of Disney and Pixar never speak of faith in a higher being but only about "relatively" shallow things such as happiness, and sometimes loyalty and love as well, which are less shallow, but still not on the level of spirituality. In the same way, it is like talking to people about God and seeing a nonchalance and superficiality about them of never even thinking about God, about the possibility He might exist and what it would mean to them. They are not very different from (anthropomorphic) animals in that sense. 
In fact, I would state it is impossible for us to rise above ourselves and enter the spiritual realm, for we are still living in this body and even our spirit resides within this body. 
Our spirit, however, can be set free and our bodies as well after death, after which we will be completely separated from sin. For now, while our spirits are on the brink of the two realms, we must deal with the fact that what our spirit does not want, our body wants, and our mind and spirit should control the body. 

*21 So I find it to be a law that when I want to do right, evil lies close at hand. 22 For I delight in the law of God, in my inner being, 23 but I see in my members another law waging war against the law of my mind and making me captive to the law of sin that dwells in my members.* 

These verses exactly state what I had in mind. This only confirms my interpretation of this chapter. So what this part says is that our body is like two people, each in a different realm and with different laws. Our heavenly person wants to obey the law of God and make his body holy as well, but he is pulled back by the earthly person who wants to who has the same mission to bring back this heavenly person to Earth and make him abide by the law of the flesh.
Of course, in a formal debate there is no chance that the earthly person could ever win–by all definitions of what is good, heaven would win by a landslide–but in practice however, the earthly person wins sometimes, partly because the heavenly man had been an earthly man before and enjoyed all that is on Earth. 
Biologically speaking one could say that he had an amount of chemicals in his brains,  the same kind of stuff that one gets when using drugs, dopamine. 
That is the reason why so many drug addicts fall back into their old addiction, because they want to feel this amount of dopamine in their brains again, but nothing here on Earth gives them that, except for a drug stronger than their previous one or perhaps numbing drugs, so they at least do not feel the lack of dopamine. 
Real happiness, however, does not come from dopamine only. It comes from love and affection, respect and mutual interests. Love for people and to be loved in return is the best feeling there is and it all originates from God Who started loving us and so spread the fire.  
If dopamine were the only thing that gives us happiness it would be like saying that the orgasm is the only part of sex that is interesting, but we all know that is not the case, for otherwise masturbation would be all that people desire.
However, just like masturbation, people often and rather choose the easy way to be satisfied quickly instead of choosing the more difficult and longer way that leads to a higher result, because they either do not know what the higher result is—that is, a feeling much more euphoric than dopamine could ever give—or they have forgotten this feeling. 
This is exemplified in contemporary (sexual) relationships. People either do not get married, because they think it cannot get any better than the relationship they already have, where they have a partner yet have freedom to leave anytime they want (provided they do not have any children), or they are married and cheat on their spouses—thinking that they can go back to their previous state of being single and have sex with anyone—but now it feels different—and it feels different for several reasons. 
The first reason is that they have changed. They are not the young, single person they were before their marriage. Their state has changed, better yet, even *officially* their status has changed from *single* to *married*. And just like when one shifts from the earthly (deadly) realm to the spiritual realm, along with one's taste and preferences, so this change to being married influence's one's preferences as well. This is not known to the person who cheats, however, as he only finds out *after* he has cheated on his spouse. He (or she) did not realize that his body has now become one with another person and that whatever he does to damage it, will also damage his "other half", that is his spouse.
The second reason is analogous to the biological and psychological explanation. This person is looking for the same amount of excitement with which he had sex as a single. Now, as a married person, he probably has less sex, less intense and long, and less loudly because of his children sleeping in the room next door. I am not talking about most marriages or about my own experience, but I am basing this on the image that is portrayed in movies, which has a core of truth in it. That is why this person thinks that if only he could have sex like he used to, he is going to have fun again. 
The result is, that is he is not going to have the same feeling, and he will then think that is because of the age of the woman he cheats with, for when he was young, his girlfriends were young as well. And so his next step is to find younger women to sleep with, but eventually that does not satisfy either. 
A whole number of other things then pop up in his head as a possible cause of this euphoria-anemia and—if he has the money for it—he will try out everything he had when he was young, a nice car, cool stuff, losing weight—in short, that is the mid-life crisis. 
This person, or man in this case, does not realize that his happiness is a sum of multiple things, but made up of love. Someone once wrote that being loved is the highest form of happiness #todo/opzoeken , and the man does not realize that, and he will not realize it if he does not love his wife, for the less he loves his wife, the less his wife loves him back. 

*24 Wretched man that I am! Who will deliver me from this body of death? 25 Thanks be to God through Jesus Christ our Lord! So then, I myself serve the law of God with my mind, but with my flesh I serve the law of sin.*

How wretched this is for the man who feels this, but at the same time he is blessed for feeling it. In fact everybody should feel this, but not everybody reaches this realization of what Paul describes and which I have tried to explain above. Indeed, it is a battle between the mind and the flesh and when the flesh has won, it hardly remains a battle. That is why many do not see this battle, because they have already been defeated.
The war, however, is not over yet, as this message continues in Chapter 8 and should be read continuously with Chapter 7. There it says that even though we sin, it will not be accounted to us through Jesus' sacrifice.  



#biblestudy/devotionals/romans