# Romans 12 (ESV) 
**A Living Sacrifice**
::*1 I appeal to you therefore, brothers, by the mercies of God, to present your bodies as a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God, which is your spiritual worship.*::

#church/material #todo/nogaftemaken  Logisch, wat is dat? dat volgt uit 11:36, dat het logisch is dat je God eer geeft door het meest kostbare te geven van jezelf. Niet een onderdeel van je lichaam, maar alles. **Voorbeeld.** Als je heel erg moet plassen, ga je... een kop koffie drinken. -> dat is niet logisch. 

Note that presenting our bodies, though physical they are, is *spiritual* worship. It is not *what* is being used that defines the worship, but *how* it is used. We can use our skills in the office to make money for ourselves in a selfish way or to make money to give to others. We can use the same skills to help growing companies, even if these are not charitable ones, even when getting paid commercial tariffs for it, and still honoring God, by delivering good work. 
It is the last part of the sentence that makes it spiritual, that is holy and acceptable to God. Now what does it mean to be *holy* and *acceptable*? If something is holy it automatically is acceptable, but does it go the other way around as well? 
I think that being acceptable is what God accepts from us, which is, by definition due to our sinful nature, never fully holy—for a sinful person cannot bring a sinless sacrifice. Of course Jesus Christ died for us and therefore we can bring Him gifts which have been cleansed by Him. It is only for this reason that God can accept our gifts, such as our praise and our works. But initially, God wanted us to be holy and then sacrifice not only our gifts, but our *bodies* themself. 
Now it is of no use to sacrifice a dead body to God. God can make the dead rise again but except for showing that He can do that and by this showing that He is God, for only God can raise the dead, there are no other examples in the Bible where God uses the dead. The living, however, are much more useful, once they have been cleansed. 
Maria of Magdala for example was cleansed from seven demon spirits #todo/opzoeken and after that she devoted her life to Jesus Christ and became His follower. 
Paul as well had to be cleansed. First of all, his eyes had to be cleansed, which was literally yet symbolically done when the scales fell off his eyes. He received new eyes with which he could see that what he was doing was wrong. 
~Holiness entails first of all seeing what is good and wrong.~ #todo/nogaftemaken

Spiritual worship entails
* Living sacrifice
	* Voluntary
	* It needs to cost something
* Holy
	* It needs to be clean
* Acceptable
	* It needs to be something God wants

**Voorbeeld.** Laat kinderen hun handen vies maken en daarna mij een schoon A4-papiertje geven. Het lukt niet om iets schoon te geven als jezelf vies bent. 

So in order to be holy, we first need to know what is. Our eyes need to be cleaned. Then, in verse 2, even after being cleaned, we read that we must change in a way to stay clean. 
Now that your eyes are clear you can see which things are unclean. What will you do then? You must stay far away from them and not conform to them but rather let yourself be transformed by God. Why, because only after being transformed do we know what is good, acceptable and perfect. 
There are many things in this world that we see as good, but that which is good, is not always the will of God, it may not be acceptable to His standard and it may not be perfect. 
Now nothing is ever perfect in this world, but if out of two choices one choice must be made, one choice is the good one, no matter the consequences, and that is the perfect choice. 
Take for example the story of the judge #todo/opzoeken Gibeon? He made an oath to sacrifice to God whomever would be running out from the gate after his victory over the ... . It turned out to be his daughter. Now, no matter who it had been, Gibeon would have to break either his oath which he swore to God, or he would have to break the seventh #todo/opzoeken  commandment not to murder anyone (although it is doubtful whether this was murdering or killing, either way, it was not a righteous kill). 
It is (intuitively) clear that God does not want anyone dead for this reason and breaking the oath would have been the best choice. Better yet, it would have been the *perfect* choice, as there was no other choice. 
In reality our choices are not as clear cut or binary as Gibeon's, unfortunately, but we can trust in it that God has His perfect ways, just like Jesus knew the perfect answers to the Pharisees' trick questions and traps. Solomon knew the perfect answer to the two prostitutes who were fighting over a child in order to determine the real mother. 
By transforming our mind we will also know the will of God and know this perfect answer. 
Now about acceptability, it is more than just something that is good. It is something God wants and it must be above a certain standard. Being clean is one of those standards, but it is not sufficient. A menorah for example needed to have seven arms and a hanukah nine. Even if it were *kosher*, i.e. it was completely made of gold, by a Jew, with legal money, not touched by heathens or cleansed with the fire after it had been touched, then still it would not be acceptable if the candle stand only had six arms. God's standard are perfect, it needs to be done exactly the way he wants. 

::*2 Do not be conformed to this world, but be transformed by the renewal of your mind, that by testing you may discern what is the will of God, what is good and acceptable and perfect.*:: #biblestudy/memorization/todo

The ruler of this world wants to transform us into anything but what is said in the first verse. God wants us to give all of our lives to Him, and not merely give it, He wants the gift to be holy and acceptable. And still not only does He want that, He wants it to be voluntary. 
Then, when we have given it, even though our gift right now is not perfect, we continue perfecting this gift. It sounds like when one gives another a car as a gift, and afterwards the giver starts testing what is good for the car. Should that not be done beforehand? Yes it should, but the problem is that the giver himself does not even know what is best for the car, because he did not build the car. In the same way we cannot give ourselves in a perfect way, because we do not understand ourselves perfectly nor have we tested everything.
Now this car, if it has any settings, should not be conformed to this world's settings, but rather to the one who is going to use it. Likewise with our bodies, they should be conformed to the Father Who wants to use it for His purposes, whether it is destruction at an early age with only a short period of evangelization and Islamic apologetics, as in the case of Nabeel Qureshi #tags/famouspeople or for spreading the Gospel until a very high age, like Billy Graham. Either way, it is all for His glory. 
The godless do not even know, but they and their bodies too have been created for His glory and even the evil is somehow attributing to His glory. Only the fact that God and His works and the works of His people are in stark contrast with the devil's work, helps the world see the devil's real face. 
#church/material

**Gifts of Grace**
*3 For by the grace given to me I say to everyone among you not to think of himself more highly than he ought to think, but to think with sober judgment, each according to the measure of faith that God has assigned.*

Right after the first two verses, about transforming your mind to God's, Paul explains the reason why. The answer is that we are not as high as we think we are. If we think we do not need to be transformed, then we should again, but this time with sober judgment. 
Now it is true that need more transformation then others. What should we say then of those who transformed so much as is humanly possible? People like David Pawson perhaps or Rick Warren #tags/famouspeople, both of whom I do not know personally, seem to so friendly that even when they disagree, they can stay friends with the other party. Those people should measure themselves with the faith God has assigned to them. 
Now it is for sure that these two people have great faith. With my faith, which is small compared to theirs, I would see hardly any transformation needed in them. But since their faith is greater, I would expect they will see that there still is a lot that needs to be changed, maybe even more than I can see in my own life. 

Note that the measure of faith has been *assigned* to one. Faith is not from oneself (cf. Ephesians 2:8-9), neither is the amount of it, but from God. This also humbles us in knowing that if our faith is greater, even that was an initial gift by God. 

*4 For as in one body we have many members, and the members do not all have the same function, 5 so we, though many, are one body in Christ, and individually members one of another. 6 Having gifts that differ according to the grace given to us, let us use them: if prophecy, in proportion to our faith; 7 if service, in our serving; the one who teaches, in his teaching; 8 the one who exhorts, in his exhortation; the one who contributes, in generosity; the one who leads, with zeal; the one who does acts of mercy, with cheerfulness.*

Another way of measuring oneself and to think more highly of others (and less of oneself) is by looking the functions we have been given. If we have been given an honorable and visible function, we should thank God, for it was He Who gave us this function. If someone is working in his function, which is less honorable than yours, we should also thank God that he is working in his function. It would be better than that he were trying to work in another function which does not suit him. That would not make him feel better nor the people around him. 
So we can humble ourself in knowing that is was God Who gave us our faith and Who gave us our function, and on top of that measure our faith and works within this function by the measure of faith of we have been given. A prophet with a lof of faith, who does not say much, but like Elijah at one time was very anxious, is not a good prophet given the amount of gifts he has received. 

**Marks of the True Christian**
*9 Let love be genuine. Abhor what is evil; hold fast to what is good.*

Genuine love shows itself in both loving and abhorring. If one loves one, he hates the other. This goes for serving God (cf. Matthew 6:24) as well as loving your neighbor. 
Now I, personally, do not abhor certain things, when I hear about someone cheating on his wife, while I see other people clearly being abhorred by it, such as Liz Wheeler and even more so Allie Beth-Stuckey #tags/famouspeople, when they are talking about Trump's personality (as seen in Ben Shapiro's Sunday Special). This is then, as a logical consequence of the above reasoning, because I do not love people and women in particular in this case, as I should. 
Of course, it is something that needs to change within me, but this verse is a good indicator of such things.

*10 ::Love one another with brotherly affection. Outdo one another in showing honor.::* 

This is very big commandment. I was speaking about the latter part of the verse but after looking again I see that the first one is very difficult as well and possibly even more difficult. 
The second command to show honor is very common thing in eastern cultures. During a  [debate](https://www.rzim.org/read/rzim-global/nabeel-qureshi-debates-muslim-apologist-shabir-ally) between Nabeel Qureshi and Shabir Ally #tags/famouspeople Qureshi started by honoring Shabir as the better and more experienced debater, upon which Ally replied during his turn that Qureshi is the more knowledgeable about the Christian God #todo/opzoeken wat er precies werd gezegd. This prompted a very friendly debate in which, even after Ally said about an argument Qureshi made: "You can do better than that, Nabeel" he instantly #todo/opzoeken/engels  and told the audience: "I am sorry  [...] I take that back." 
The honoring of people can really change the mood between people and is as powerful as James mentioned when he spoke of the power of the tongue (cf. James 3:1-11).

Now Chinese people, for example, honor others well, but not always with genuine feelings for each other. They lift up the other so that the other will not lose face, and in return they expect the same.

Of course the Bible is always speaking of genuine feelings when it commands something. But it is like there is a way to at least fake it for others, although no one can cheat God Himself.
It is just like the Pharisees, they know they are not cheating God, but they care more about the short term benefits, which is honor from man.
The former verse, however, cannot be faked. We must love our fellowmen genuinely, and with *brotherly* affection! This means so much as giving our life for the other. There is no command in the Bible to love one only a little, only as much as it will not hurt yourself, your materials or your privacy. Does this mean then that one should allow all beggars to live in his house and use up all of his food? Fortunately—and I say this with shame, because I am not one of those big hearted people—we do not have to. There is a responsibility for each person. A man's responsibility is to take care of the safety of his family, and to provide for them. This means that he should block each factor with excessive risk out of the house, including certain multimedia items, such as movies and music, but also certain people. On the other hand, a beggar has a responsibility as well and helping him is not always equal to loving him. A drug addict is not helped when provided with drugs or money, with which he most likely will buy more drugs, or even with food, if he refuses to work.
Francis Chan #tags/famouspeople once took an ex-convict into his home, who was tall and big and whom he had just met on the streets. He was just converted to Christianity and had no place to live, so Francis brought him home and decided to let him live there for a few months. This is a very risky thing to do, and Francis had his doubts as well, he mentioned in a sermon, but he also had a feeling, most likely the Holy Spirit, telling him that this was the right thing to do. Ultimately, the Holy Spirit is our guidance. He can tell you to do something utterly risky or He can tell you not to do something that seems completely safe. Either way, what He tells you to do will be out of brotherly affection. 

*11 Do not be slothful in zeal, be fervent in spirit, serve the Lord.*

This is a whole list of things that we as Christians need to do. Multiple commentaries explain it this way. But why would Paul, after writing a big deal of prose, suddenly switch to listing attributes? I know he introduces Chapter 12 with his first two verses, explaining what we should do, but it is not as if he said "here is a list of all the marks of a Christian."
In order to get the answer to this question we need to zoom out see what Chapters 12 and further aim for. Then we will see what Paul says the following: 
* Be transformed to God's will (verses 1-2)
* Do not think you do not need change, you might need change even more, depending on your gift (verses 3-8)
* This is what needs to change in you (verse 9 until further chapters)

Now these changes are grouped by pericopes and paragraphs. The pericope starting with verse 9 is called "Marks of the True Christian" in the ESV, but actually everything following even in later chapters are marks of the true Christian. 
Then, the paragraph starting at verse 9 begins with "Let love be genuine", to show that this paragraph is about the marks of love, while the paragraph starting at verse 14 is about blessing. However, this does not really seem to be the case, as verses 11 and further are about zeal, joy and prayer. 
In any case, these paragraphs are made up by people, but the contents are what is most important. 

So as for being slothful in zeal. Sloth itself is a big sin, according to Catholicism it is even one of the seven deadly sins, which are the main sins from which every sin is derived. Do not be slothful in zeal, be fervent in spirit, serve the Lord.
I will take the sentences at face value, though, and assume that the different elements in this sentence are related to each other.
It is ultimately about serving the Lord, not only in this sentence but in everything we do. Whether we obey Him and love others, is done because we serve the Lord, and we serve the Lord because we love Him.
That is why, when serving someone we love, we are not slothful but rather zealous. We are not asleep, but fervent in spirit.
Now what does it mean to be fervent? It is the same feeling one has when he wakes up, after having had a good night's rest, with plenty of hours, good dreams, a good mattress and cool pillow. Fervent according to the dictionary means "hot" or "passionate", but it is not only about *being* passionate, it is also about *doing* things here, which is why I am using the example of waking up well because on those mornings one really feels like taking action.
The reason we do not daily have a fervent feeling is because of the lack of the above-mentioned things. I am not talking about sleep perse, but about our position in life. Are not many of us tired of what we do in life? And why is that? It is because the things that are supposed to give us rest, such as the pillow and the mattress in the example above are not of good quality, or the position we take before sleeping was a bad one to begin with, such as when someone lies partially straight up to read a book and then falls asleep while reading. 
Spiritually the former examples are given in the form prayer and silent time. Just like a pillow is supposed to support your neck, which is a vital in supporting your brains in fact, and also is it actually part of your peripheral nerve system #todo/opzoeken  of heet het intern/extern?
and a mattress is supposed to support your back, in the same way we need a spiritual pillow and mattress to support our spiritual head and body. Our head is what we think and feel with. When we think the wrong way, we will not be peaceful or passionate about anything. The peace that guards the minds as mentioned by Paul in Philippians 4:7 comes from the mentioned prayer in the verse preceding it, and not just prayer, but a threefold combination existing of prayer, petition and thanksgiving. 
Then what can we compare the mattress with? That would be unity then. Colossians 3:15 says
> *"And let the peace of Christ rule in your hearts, to which indeed you were called in one body. And be thankful."*  
and Philippians 1:27b says
> "you are standing firm in one spirit, with one mind striving side by side for the faith of the gospel"  
This peace between people, not to be confused with the peace in our minds, is what makes us one in the spirit. For how could one body fight against itself? This happens when people have auto-immune diseases, but spiritually, as God created it, this is not possible. Discussions between theologians such as Michael Brown and John MacArthur #tags/famouspeople about for example cessationism are not meant as polemic devices to destroy one another, but rather to build the other up (as well as the readers of their respective books). They can be peaceful because their purpose is to show each other what they believe is the truth, not for their own selfish purposes, but in order that the other may stand correctly before God and with a clear conscience. 

*12 Rejoice in hope, be patient in tribulation, be constant in prayer. 13 Contribute to the needs of the saints and seek to show hospitality.*

It is for the same reasons that the following two verses emphasize prayer and the unity with other Christians. Verse 12 is not even stated as "pray and then you will rejoice in hope". Rejoicing is not put as there as a consequence but rather as a something a Christian should just "do", even though it is not a thing that can be done, but must occur out of a feeling. For Christians, however, this should be a normal thing to do, when prayer is also on this same list. 

*14 Bless those who persecute you; bless and do not curse them.*

Continuing in these marks of the Christian we get one of the most difficult traits to actually commit to on a daily basis: the blessing. Not only is this verse asking to *love* those whom we hate—and we could hate people for a number of small to larger things—but it is asking us to *bless* those who *persecute* us. The Bible very often does not only ask us to do the opposite of what people usually do, which already is a hard task, but it then asks us to add more love on top of that. See what Jesus said in the Gospels about walking the extra mile with the Roman soldier for example, or what is written below in verses 19 and further. 
In this verse we should not only not hate our persecutors, but we should first of all, love them and second of all bless them, which means we wish them well, that their life is good, and thirdly, they are not mere people who hurt us, but who *persecuted* us and perhaps have killed some of us already.
How is it ever possible to love people like that? The only way possible is if you think you are able to do so, ~that is when you have hope. Now why would it require hope to bless someone?~ #todo/nogaftemaken this hope is needed so that one can finish this process of forgiveness 
Remember the three steps we took in the previous paragraph. We need to 
1. *Relativize* or *View the persecutor as a normal human being* 
2. *Forgive*
3. *Bless*

**Step 1. View the persecutor as a normal human being**
Often we can forgive people for smaller mistakes, because they are human. By "human" we usually mean that we have committed these mistakes ourselves as well. This means that we, "normal" human beings commit "normal" size sins and sins of others can be forgiven when these are within our range of acceptance, which is defined by the sins we do ourselves.
As soon as the sin we are confronted with is bigger than a sin we have ever done ourselves, we are shocked by it and we see no way of forgiving this person. 

(Looking at Jesus will relativize the sin of others
#todo/nogaftemaken 

**Step 2. Forgive**
Ultimately, blessing the other means two things—actually, they are two consecutive steps. First, you do not hold a grudge against this person, that is you forgive this person and do not want anything bad to happen to this person. Second, you wish the other person well—that is you wish something good will happen to that person. 
As for forgiveness, this itself consists of two parts. 
The first part is pointed towards yourself and is causing one being unable to have peace. Suppose you are a doctor. You are performing surgery on someone you love and your assistant brings you the wrong tools. Due to the loss of critical time the person on the operating table dies or is severely hurt. Now you cannot forgive your assistant. The questions that keep popping up in your head are: "Why did you bring me the wrong tool? Do you know how it feels to lose someone you love?" The person asking that question has no peace of mind until his questions are answered.
Now the last question implies he wants the other person to feel the same thing he is feeling. This brings us to the second part of forgiveness, which is pointed towards others. Forgiving means that you should not *hold* a grudge. It is phrased very well by the word "hold" because unforgiveness actually is like holding on to something that hurts you. If you let it go it cannot hurt you anymore. Now what is this thing that you are holding on to? It is the desire for the other person to be inflicted with pain. Every kind of unforgiveness ultimately has to do with someone who hurt you, directly or indirectly. This is, as far as I know, *always* the intent of unforgiveness and revenge. The only difference between the two is that in the former the latter is not enacted and resides within the heart. The movie *Don't Breathe* #tags/movies depicts this very well in a father whose daughter has been killed in a car accident by a woman. Out of justice he takes the woman's child. Supposedly simply in order for him to get back what was his, that is a child, but also to let the woman feel what it means to lose something. It is not mentioned in the movie that this was his ulterior motive, but when one thinks logically it is clear that he wants her to suffer whether it is by losing her freedom or her child.

**Step 3. Bless**
The word bless is even written two times in this verse, to emphasize that this needs to be done as if it is not clear to us. Now it is true that most of us do not know what blessing another means. Is it simply telling the other "I bless you with a happy or healthy life?" This has no meaning at all. First of all, our words have no power perse. God's words have powers of creation and destruction, but ours do not. God does warn us against cursing him or others and even poses the death penalty for that, so perhaps there is some power in that, but only because God gives it power. Second of all, how do you bless another if you cannot meet him? 
Blessing ultimately happens by God. He is the One Who blesses man with riches, happiness or health and all we can do is ask God to bless him. So a blessing always means that we pray to God for the other, for our persecutors. 
Of course we bless our persecutors with knowing God first, and then with being blessed in their new life. 

*15 Rejoice with those who rejoice, weep with those who weep.*

A hallmark of true Christians is empathy or better yet, compassion. Rejoicing with others who rejoice, even if it is not a reason you would rejoice for, is show of selflessness. It is easy for one to rejoice when one has something to be joyful about. If another person wins the lottery and you get a small part of it, you will be rejoicing, but more for yourself than for the other. When we watch a movie and we are rejoicing for a good ending for the protagonist, such as in the movie *The Pursuit of Happyness* #tags/movies# , some of us are selfless and rooting for Will Smith because we wish him the best, others, however, are only rooting because they do not want to be left with a bad feeling, as one has with movies like *Memento*. 
Weeping therefore is an easier thing to do than rejoicing and so in my opinion rejoicing with others is the true hallmark, but sincere weeping and not merely pitying another is not far from it. 

*16 ::Live in harmony with one another. Do not be haughty, but associate with the lowly. Never be wise in your own sight.::* 

My conscience is speaking to me as I have been writing about this and the previous verses. Being a Christian is not an easy job, it is not something one must do for a short while, it is what he must do continuously and live out. Especially the ones who live with you know your true character. That is what makes living in harmony so difficult. You cannot hide it from the other. What also makes it difficult is to keep this harmony. There are so many ways in which the harmony can be disrupted. For each of those forgiveness must be granted and sometimes it is forgiveness upon forgiveness—and that is aside from all the other things the encompass harmony, such as patience, friendliness and all the other virtuous characteristics of love. 
As for being haughty, this too is one of my pitfalls. It is one of the main reasons why I cannot live nor even *work* with people in harmony. I always want things to go the way I want them to go, because I think my way is the best way. Now that in itself is not causing the problems, it is when I encounter people who do not want to go my way. In those cases I need to accept that we go for a compromise or a different solution altogether. My haughtiness, however, rejects this kind of solution. I think of myself so highly that it seems like it is the only way to go forward. 
The last verse is speaking to me as well, for I am wise in my own sight. In others' sights, especially God's I am not, for there are several things I am missing here. I am missing the importance of relationships. By pushing my way other people will get out of my way either voluntarily or forcibly, which destroys the trust and ultimately the relationship.
The second thing I am missing is related and is the appreciation and encouragement of others. I am neglecting the input of others and especially those lacking self-confidence will think their ideas are not good enough and are not stimulated to come up more often with new ideas.
The idea of this verse is never to be wise in your own sight. If you do, you will not see the greatness of the blessing God has for you either through His or others' wisdom. 

*17 Repay no one evil for evil, but give thought to do what is honorable in the sight of all.* 

We often think in terms of equity and equality. When we think about justice, a person needs to receive punishment according to the principle of *an eye for an eye*. However, in practice only God knows the real value of the one eye and whether it can be repaid for by the other eye. It is for this reason that God has also commanded that the Israelites bring forward their case to the priests who would then judge over it and later on to the judge (although I am not sure whether the judges in the book of *Judges* are among this category) #todo/opzoeken #biblestudy/questions and king. 1 Kings also clearly shows that wisdom should be a trait of the person who judges, in this case Solomon, for it is needed to distinguish between minute details of each unique case.
Now an eye is a material thing which can be given to another, but a death is not something one can give to another. A family of which a member has been killed by a murderer cannot easily be compensated by the mere death of the murderer. That life might not be worth the same as their family member, e.g. their son. Now the son of that murderer might be worth it, or might even be worth more, but would the family want the innocent son of a murderer to die just so that the murderer would have the same feeling and hopefully regret? Most likely a righteous family would not want that kind of blood to be spilled and even if the murderer feels the same kind of regret, what good is it to them? Their forgiveness may have been granted then, but both are ultimately in a state of loss, i.e. having less than what they had before. 
No wonder the second part of this verse tells us to do what is *honorable* in the sight of *all*. 
These rules of punishment were given by God in order to enforce law and order, and it is the perfect way of justice. However, it was never meant as perfect way solving a relationship or emotional hurts, for that would require mercy, forgiveness and love, but God could not write that in His Law, for love and forgiveness are not things one can command the other to do. He has shown this, however, many times over in His own examples of how He forgave the Israelites, showed his patience and mercy, and He proclaimed this even through David and His other prophets. 

*18 ::If possible, so far as it depends on you, live peaceably with all. 19 Beloved, never avenge yourselves, but leave it to the wrath of God, for it is written, “Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord.” 20 To the contrary, “if your enemy is hungry, feed him; if he is thirsty, give him something to drink; for by so doing you will heap burning coals on his head.” 21 Do not be overcome by evil, but overcome evil with good.*:: 

Paul ends this chapter, the section about marks of the true Christian with one thing. He uses an important condition: *If it depends on you*. Now this is not a condition behind which we can hide. We cannot say each time whenever we have a fight with someone that it was not our fault, because there are many ways where we can avoid a fight or show the characteristics of the Fruit of the Holy Spirit (cf. Galatians 5:22). But in the rare occasion where even that does not help and where our meekness is abused, we can still leave the conversation or situation. 
Then there is also verse 19, which tells us never to avenge ourselves. While in verse 14 it already tells us to bless our persecutors and in verse 17 we should not repay evil for evil, and these should be clear enough to rule out any vengeance. However, Paul still warns us for this to make sure that we leave it to the wrath of God. 

Heaping these coals on his head will let your enemy be speechless. He will not know what to do. The reason why we ought to make him speechless, is because we should let him stop and think. We can attack him and let him run away out of fear, or we can cower ourselves and let him attack us, but in both of these cases his heart is self-righteous, that is he thinks he is doing the right thing. But as soon as we do good to him, he will stop and start thinking about what to do. That will give him a moment's rest to think about why we did what we did, and hopefully he will come to the conclusion that it is because of our love for God—and His love for our enemies—that we treat our enemies in this way.

#church/material echt doen met een bak en ballen erin bijvoorbeeld.

#biblestudy/memorization/todo

#biblestudy/devotionals/romans