# John 6 (ESV) 
***Jesus Feeds the Five Thousand***
*1 After this Jesus went away to the other side of the Sea of Galilee, which is the Sea of Tiberias. 2 And a large crowd was following him, because they saw the signs that he was doing on the sick.*

Again, the miracles Jesus has done here are called *signs*, because they are indicative for Jesus' purpose, that is to show people that He is the Son of God. 

It is amazing to imagine such a large crowd following Him. What did these people do for a daily living? Did they not have to work? Most likely the children did not have school (as school did not exist in these days), but did not have to do some kind of home school as to be instructed in the Word or in some kind of profession? At least the older children had to. I can imagine women following Jesus, but there were 5000 *men* there as well. 
Now v.1. probably starts about six months after the events in the previous chapter. Still, He must have gotten to the north side of the Sea of Galilee some way and the crowd must have come from somewhere. Even from the most nearby towns #todo/opzoeken it would have cost many hours to get to the mountains (Matthew 14:15), which is now called the Mount of the Beatitudes. It is most likely that these people did not go to the mountain just to hear Jesus speak, but they had been following Him for at least several days already. This would mean that Jesus did not feed these people on one or two occasions only, but on many more. 
Perhaps in other places, though, Jesus was around towns where food was available, and people paid for their own food, but here on the mountains there were no towns nearby. 
However, see also notes on v.3. 

*3 Jesus went up on the mountain, and there he sat down with his disciples. 4 Now the Passover, the feast of the Jews, was at hand. 5 Lifting up his eyes, then, and seeing that a large crowd was coming toward him, Jesus said to Philip, “Where are we to buy bread, so that these people may eat?”*

The crowd was not with Jesus all the time. Perhaps someone followed Jesus and His disciples to know where they were residing, and went back to the towns to tell the people, while Jesus was teaching His disciples. Then, the people gathered to go to Jesus. 

#biblestudy/questions What does the Passover have to do with this? 

*6 He said this to test him, for he himself knew what he would do. 7 Philip answered him, “Two hundred denarii worth of bread would not be enough for each of them to get a little.” 8 One of his disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter's brother, said to him, 9 “There is a boy here who has five barley loaves and two fish, but what are they for so many?”*

If the crowd was coming toward them, it would not make sense that Andrew would say that there is a boy *here*. Some time could have passed between v.5 and v.6. 

*10 Jesus said, “Have the people sit down.” Now there was much grass in the place. So the men sat down, about five thousand in number. 11 Jesus then took the loaves, and when he had given thanks, he distributed them to those who were seated. So also the fish, as much as they wanted. 12 And when they had eaten their fill, he told his disciples, “Gather up the leftover fragments, that nothing may be lost.” 13 So they gathered them up and filled twelve baskets with fragments from the five barley loaves left by those who had eaten. 14 When the people saw the sign that he had done, they said, “This is indeed the Prophet who is to come into the world!”*
*15 Perceiving then that they were about to come and take him by force to make him king, Jesus withdrew again to the mountain by himself.*

It seems like there was no sermon, for the order is that the people had come and had not eaten yet. They were not even sitting. In this explanation of the events it seems like they people came, sat down and ate, and then wanted to make Jesus king, upon which He withdrew Himself. 
John probably left out the part on the sermon, because this was sufficiently described in the Gospel of Matthew. The other peculiarities can be explained by the fact that either the people had been standing while Jesus was teaching while He was sitting, which was very common in those days (cf. Matthew 5:1), or that the people were sitting during the discourses on the mount, but wanted to stretch their legs after the sermon or stood up to look for food. 

The exact order might have been like this, if we put the four gospels together. 
Jesus left for a desert place to the Golan Heights, Bethsaida *Julia* (Luke 9:10), perhaps where the current Mount of the Beatitudes resides in Galilee. 
The people followed Him on foot (perhaps not by boats, but around the lake). 
Jesus spoke to the people (Luke 9:11). 
Jesus healed the sick until evening. (It is strange why the people did not at that moment decide to make Him king, but only after the miracle with the food.)
Jesus multiplied the bread and fish. 

#todo/nogaftemaken #todo/opzoeken Sermon on the Mount hetzelfde als dit verhaal? 

Continued in [[John 6 (LSB)]]. 
***Jesus Walks on Water***
*16 When evening came, his disciples went down to the sea, 17 got into a boat, and started across the sea to Capernaum. It was now dark, and Jesus had not yet come to them. 18 The sea became rough because a strong wind was blowing. 19 When they had rowed about three or four miles, they saw Jesus walking on the sea and coming near the boat, and they were frightened. 20 But he said to them, “It is I; do not be afraid.” 21 Then they were glad to take him into the boat, and immediately the boat was at the land to which they were going.*

***I Am the Bread of Life***
*22 On the next day the crowd that remained on the other side of the sea saw that there had been only one boat there, and that Jesus had not entered the boat with his disciples, but that his disciples had gone away alone. 23 Other boats from Tiberias came near the place where they had eaten the bread after the Lord had given thanks. 24 So when the crowd saw that Jesus was not there, nor his disciples, they themselves got into the boats and went to Capernaum, seeking Jesus.*
*25 When they found him on the other side of the sea, they said to him, “Rabbi, when did you come here?” 26 Jesus answered them, “Truly, truly, I say to you, you are seeking me, not because you saw signs, but because you ate your fill of the loaves. 27 Do not work for the food that perishes, but for the food that endures to eternal life, which the Son of Man will give to you. For on him God the Father has set his seal.” 28 Then they said to him, “What must we do, to be doing the works of God?” 29 Jesus answered them, “This is the work of God, that you believe in him whom he has sent.” 30 So they said to him, “Then what sign do you do, that we may see and believe you? What work do you perform? 31 Our fathers ate the manna in the wilderness; as it is written, He gave them bread from heaven to eat.’” 32 Jesus then said to them, “Truly, truly, I say to you, it was not Moses who gave you the bread from heaven, but my Father gives you the true bread from heaven. 33 For the bread of God is he who comes down from heaven and gives life to the world.” 34 They said to him, “Sir, give us this bread always.”*
*35 Jesus said to them, “I am the bread of life; whoever comes to me shall not hunger, and whoever believes in me shall never thirst. 36 But I said to you that you have seen me and yet do not believe. 37 All that the Father gives me will come to me, and whoever comes to me I will never cast out. 38 For I have come down from heaven, not to do my own will but the will of him who sent me. 39 And this is the will of him who sent me, that I should lose nothing of all that he has given me, but raise it up on the last day. 40 For this is the will of my Father, that everyone who looks on the Son and believes in him should have eternal life, and I will raise him up on the last day.”*
*41 So the Jews grumbled about him, because he said, “I am the bread that came down from heaven.” 42 They said, “Is not this Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we know? How does he now say, ‘I have come down from heaven’?” 43 Jesus answered them, “Do not grumble among yourselves. 44 No one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draws him. And I will raise him up on the last day. 45 It is written in the Prophets, And they will all be taught by God.’ Everyone who has heard and learned from the Father comes to me— 46 not that anyone has seen the Father except he who is from God; he has seen the Father. 47 Truly, truly, I say to you, whoever believes has eternal life. 48 I am the bread of life. 49 Your fathers ate the manna in the wilderness, and they died. 50 This is the bread that comes down from heaven, so that one may eat of it and not die. 51 I am the living bread that came down from heaven. If anyone eats of this bread, he will live forever. And the bread that I will give for the life of the world is my flesh.”*
*52 The Jews then disputed among themselves, saying, “How can this man give us his flesh to eat?” 53 So Jesus said to them, “Truly, truly, I say to you, unless you eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink his blood, you have no life in you. 54 Whoever feeds on my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life, and I will raise him up on the last day. 55 For my flesh is true food, and my blood is true drink. 56 Whoever feeds on my flesh and drinks my blood abides in me, and I in him. 57 As the living Father sent me, and I live because of the Father, so whoever feeds on me, he also will live because of me. 58 This is the bread that came down from heaven, not like the bread the fathers ate, and died. Whoever feeds on this bread will live forever.” 59 Jesus said these things in the synagogue, as he taught at Capernaum.*

***The Words of Eternal Life***
*60 When many of his disciples heard it, they said, “This is a hard saying; who can listen to it?” 61 But Jesus, knowing in himself that his disciples were grumbling about this, said to them, “Do you take offense at this? 62 Then what if you were to see the Son of Man ascending to where he was before? 63 It is the Spirit who gives life; the flesh is ::no help at all::. The words that I have spoken to you are spirit and life.*

His disciples were stumbling at this, because they heard Jesus speaking about eating His flesh. But even though Jesus did not mean this literally, which they perhaps did not know, He then went on to make this literal by saying: #composed/bible/john
> "There is something more difficult than **this** (i.e. eating my flesh, literally), which is that I, the Son of Man, will return to heaven. You were expecting me to save you from the Romans? I am not.   
It could even be that they thought the Son of Man would die, for that is also one way of interpreting the ascendance to heaven. 
But Jesus makes it more difficult on them, and He adds that it is the Spirit Who gives life and that **the flesh profits nothing** (in the ESV this is written as that the flesh is no help at all). In other words, their flesh cannot attribute to eternal life, only the Holy Spirit can and Jesus' words, which are **spirit and life**. 

*64 But there are some of you who do not believe.” (For Jesus knew from the beginning who those were who did not believe, and who it was who would betray him.) 65 And he said, “This is why I told you that no one can come to me unless it is granted him by the Father.”*

This next part is seen as part of the same paragraph in the ESV, while in the LSB this is interpreted as a new sentence. #todo/opzoeken 
I would interpret this as a new paragraph. After all that has been said, some still do not believe. This sentence is not directly related to v.63. At least, I do not know how to interpret the **but** here other than something like: "But anyway, ...", switching to the more important topic, which is that **some [...] do not believe**. 
Jesus also could have meant: 
> It is the Holy Spirit Who gives life, and I give life and spirit as well through My words. Some of you, however, still do not have life, even though you have heard My word, but that is not because of a lack of My Word, but because some of you do not believe.  
In that case v.64 would be directly related to v.63. 

*66 After this many of his disciples turned back and no longer walked with him. 67 So Jesus said to the twelve, “Do you want to go away as well?” 68 Simon Peter answered him, “Lord, to whom shall we go? You have the words of eternal life, 69 and we have believed, and have come to know, that you are the Holy One of God.” 70 Jesus answered them, “Did I not choose you, the twelve? And yet one of you is a devil.” 71 He spoke of Judas the son of Simon Iscariot, for he, one of the twelve, was going to betray him.*

The way in which Jesus answers His disciples—as happened on more than one occasion—peculiar in our eyes. Jesus is speaking in a mystical way and perhaps doing this on purpose. It could also have been a translation or transliteration and that in Hebrew this might have sounded very normal, but in English would be very strange. I do not think it is because of that reason though.
Perhaps Jesus was responding to Peter's answer. John later explains in his letter, 1 John 1, how we may know we **have come to know** Him, namely by keeping His Word. With this in mind, we can understand Jesus' answer better. Peter says that they **know**that Jesus is the Holy One of God, but Jesus implies, perhaps, that *knowing* also entails *obeying*, and yet one of them is not obedient.
Another interpretation is that Jesus is posing a seemingly contradiction. He first said that **no one can come to me unless it is granted him by the Father.** But then He says that the Twelve are chosen by Him (and He is equal to the Father). By the way, in John 17 He also says that the twelve are given to Him by the Father. So when Jesus chooses or the Father gives or grants, these are synonymous. But the point is that Judas was chosen by Jesus and should be able to come to Him, but still he would betray Jesus and he is a devil.
Does Jesus imply here then that even Judas would have been able to come to Jesus? And can even devils do that? #todo/opzoeken meaning of devil #biblestudy/questions/rootwords Or should we really see that Judas is an exception to this rule? For John 17 Jesus also says that He guarded and kept *all* of them and none has been lost, except for Judas, but only so that the Scripture might be fulfilled. 

#biblestudy/devotionals/john