# John 11 (LSB)
### The Death and Resurrection of Lazarus
**John 11:1**   Now a certain man was sick, Lazarus from aBethany, the village of Mary and her sister bMartha. **2** And it was *the* Mary who aanointed bthe Lord with perfume, and wiped His feet with her hair, whose brother Lazarus was sick. **3** So the sisters sent to Him, saying, “aLord, behold, bhe whom You love is sick.”



**4** But when Jesus heard*this*, He said, “This sickness is not to end in death, but is for athe glory of God, so that the Son of God may be glorified by it.” **5** Now Jesus loved aMartha and her sister and Lazarus. **6** So when He heard that he was sick, He then stayed two days in the place where He was. **7** Then after this He said to the disciples, “aLet us go to Judea again.” **8** The disciples said to Him, “aRabbi, the Jews were just now seeking bto stone You, and are You going there again?”

#todo/nogaftemaken 

**9** Jesus answered, “aAre there not twelve hours in the day? If anyone walks in the day, he does not stumble, because he sees the light of this world. **10** “But if anyone walks in the night, he stumbles, because the light is not in him.” 

Jesus in effect says that there are only two ways of walking: walking in the light and being stoned, or walking in the dark and stumbling. In both cases one will fall to the ground. Perhaps the second case seems less painful from the world's point of view, but from a spiritual point of view, in the first case one at least knows where he is going to and though the stoning may be fatal—which is not always the case, see e.g. the stoning and beating of Paul in Acts #todo/opzoeken/reference —if one dies, he still knows where he is going to in the afterlife. However, one who walks in the dark is definitely lost, for he does not know where he is nor where he is going to, nor can he ask anyone, for no one who is in the dark can be trusted for they, too, either do not know the way or have ill intentions.
There is no option that is painless, because we live in this world everything is tainted, but as Christians we choose the best way. 

Jesus also distinguishes between two states and two states only: one **walks in the day  [...] because he sees the light of this world** or he **walks in the night [...] because the light is not in him**. We would think there are intermediate possibilities such as not having the light, but still being able to see it (and wondering about what state one would be in then), but in the Kingdom of God this is not possible. In John 8:44 for example Jesus also says that the devil who does not have the truth in him cannot stand in the truth (which I am applying to his followers as well). Using the same line of thought we can say that those who are not *of* the light cannot *see* or *bear* to see the light. Take for example fish who live in the depth of the ocean or in dark caves, some literally cannot see light at all and some have such sensitive eyes that regular daylight could blind their eyes. And so in the same way we can say that those who walk in the light cannot see or bear to see the light and have to remain in the light, until they have changed from the inside, given receptors that fit the light. 

Jesus' remark about there being **twelve hours in the day**, however, does not refer to the two types of people in the world, but to His remaining time of ministry on Earth in this "state", that is the human form before His crucifixion, according to *MacSBNnkjv*. Though this may be true, there still is a deeper meaning in Jesus' words, for otherwise Jesus would not have said **because the light is not in him**. One can walk in the light as long as there is light present, by means of a lantern for example. But if there are no external lights present, then the only way to walk in the dark is when there is a light *in* one. And so with this interpretation this means that all people can walk in daylight, both good and bad, but only those who have the light in them, i.e. Christians, can also walk in the dark without stumbling. *MacSBNnkjv* is wrong in the statement it makes that 'Jesus would "stumble" in death' for this would mean that Jesus does not have the light in Him.

Chris Verhagen, an apologist in the Netherlands, came with a fourth interpretation of this verse, which is a good addition to my third interpretation. He said that those walking in the light may die as well, but their days are governed by God. They have nothing to fear, for if they die, it is God's will. But those walk in the night do fear, for they could stumble at any time. 

**11** He said these things, and after that He said to them, “Our afriend Lazarus bhas fallen asleep; but I go, so that I may awaken him.” **12** The disciples then said to Him, “Lord, if he has fallen asleep, he will 1be saved*from his sickness*.” **13** Now aJesus had spoken of his death, but they thought that He was speaking of 1actual sleep. **14** So Jesus then said to them 1plainly, “Lazarus is dead, **15** and I am glad for your sakes that I was not there, so that you may believe; but let us go to him.” **16** aTherefore Thomas, who is called 1bDidymus, said to *his* fellow disciples, “Let us also go, so that we may die with Him.”


#todo/nogaftemaken 

**John 11:17**   So when Jesus came, He found that he had already been in the tomb afour days. **18** Now aBethany was near Jerusalem, about 1fifteen stadia away; **19** and many of athe Jews had come to bMartha and Mary, cto console them about their brother. **20** aMartha therefore, when she heard that Jesus was coming, went to meet Him, but bMary was sitting in the house. **21** Martha then said to Jesus, “aLord, bif You had been here, my brother would not have died. **22** “But even now I know that awhatever You ask from God, God will give You.” **23** Jesus said to her, “Your brother will rise again.” **24** Martha said to Him, “aI know that he will rise again in the resurrection on the last day.” **25** Jesus said to her, “aI am the resurrection and the life; he who believes in Me will live even if he dies, **26** and everyone who lives and believes in Me awill never die—ever. Do you believe this?” **27** She said to Him, “Yes, Lord; I have believed that You are athe 1Christ, the Son of God, 2bthe One who comes into the world.”

**John 11:28**   And when she had said this, she awent away and called Mary her sister, saying secretly, “bThe Teacher is here and is calling for you.” **29** And when she heard it, she got up quickly and was coming to Him.

**John 11:30**   Now Jesus had not yet come into the village, but awas still in the place where Martha met Him. **31** aThen the Jews—who were with her in the house and bconsoling her—when they saw that Mary rose up quickly and went out, they followed her, thinking that she was going to the tomb to cry there. **32** Therefore, when Mary came where Jesus was, she saw Him, and fell at His feet, saying to Him, “aLord, bif You had been here, my brother would not have died.” **33** When Jesus therefore saw her crying, and athe Jews who came with her *also* crying, He bwas 1deeply moved in spirit and 2cwas troubled, **34** and said, “Where have you laid him?” They said to Him, “Lord, come and see.” **35** Jesus awept. **36** So athe Jews were saying, “See how He bloved him!” **37** But some of them said, “Could not this man, who aopened the eyes of the blind man, 1have kept this man also from dying?”

**John 11:38**   So Jesus, again being 1deeply moved within, came to the tomb. Now it was a acave, and a stone was lying against it. **39** Jesus said, “Remove the stone.” Martha, the sister of the deceased, said to Him, “Lord, by this time he smells, for he has been*dead*afour days.” **40** Jesus said to her, “aDid I not say to you that if you believe, you will see the glory of God?” **41** So they removed the astone. Then Jesus braised His eyes, and said, “cFather, I thank You that You have heard Me. **42** “And I knew that You always hear Me; but abecause of the crowd standing around I said this, so that they may believe that bYou sent Me.” **43** And when He had said these things, He cried out with a loud voice, “Lazarus, come forth.” **44** The man who had died came forth, abound hand and foot with wrappings, and bhis face was wrapped around with a cloth. Jesus said to them, “Unbind him, and let him go.”

**John 11:45**   aTherefore many of the Jews bwho came to Mary, and csaw what He had done, believed in Him. **46** But some of them went to the aPharisees and told them the things which Jesus had done.

#biblestudy/devotionals/john

#todo/opzoeken difference between may, possibly, probably, perhaps
