# John 10 (LSB)
### I Am the Good Shepherd
**John 10:1**   “Truly, truly, I say to you, he who does not enter by the door into the fold of the sheep, but climbs up some other way, he is aa thief and a robber. **2** “But he who enters by the door is aa shepherd of the sheep. **3** “To him the doorkeeper opens, and the sheep hear ahis voice, and he calls his own sheep by name and bleads them out. **4** “When he brings all his own out, he goes ahead of them, and the sheep follow him because they know ahis voice. **5** “A stranger they will never follow, but will flee from him, because they do not know athe voice of strangers.” **6** This afigure of speech Jesus spoke to them, but they did not understand what those things were which He had been saying to them.

**John 10:7**   So Jesus said to them again, “Truly, truly, I say to you, I am athe door of the sheep. **8** “All who came before Me are athieves and robbers, but the sheep did not hear them. **9** “aI am the door; if anyone enters through Me, he will be saved, and will go in and out and find pasture. **10** “The thief comes only to steal and kill and destroy; I came that they amay have life, and 1have*it* abundantly.

**John 10:11**   “aI am the good shepherd; the good shepherd blays down His life for the sheep. **12** “He who is a hired hand, and not a ashepherd, who is not the owner of the sheep, sees the wolf coming, and leaves the sheep and flees—and the wolf snatches and scatters them— **13** because he is a hired hand and is not concerned about the sheep. **14** “aI am the good shepherd, and bI know My own and My own know Me, **15** even as athe Father knows Me and I know the Father; and bI lay down My life for the sheep. **16** “And I have aother sheep, which are not from this fold; I must bring them also, and they will hear My voice; and they will become bone flock*with*cone shepherd. **17** “For this reason the Father loves Me, because I alay down My life so that I may take it again. **18** “aNo one 1takes it away from Me, but from Myself, I blay it down. I have authority to lay it down, and I have authority to take it up again. cThis commandment I received from My Father.”

**John 10:19**   aA division occurred again among the Jews because of these words. **20** And many of them were saying, “He ahas a demon and bis insane. Why do you listen to Him?” **21** Others were saying, “These are not the words of someone ademon-possessed. bCan a demon open the eyes of the blind?”

### I and the Father Are One
**John 10:22**   At that time the Feast of the Dedication took place at Jerusalem; **23** it was winter, and Jesus was walking in the temple in the Portico of aSolomon. **24** aThe Jews then gathered around Him, and were saying to Him, “How long 1will You keep us in suspense? If You are the 2Christ, tell us bopenly.” **25** Jesus answered them, “aI told you, and you do not believe; bthe works that I do in My Father’s name, these bear witness of Me. **26** “But you do not believe because ayou are not of My sheep. **27** “My sheep ahear My voice, and bI know them, and they follow Me; **28** and I give aeternal life to them, and they will never perish—ever; and bno one will snatch them out of My hand. **29** “1My Father, who has given*them* to Me, is greater than all; and no one is able to snatch*them* out of the Father’s hand. **30** “aI and the Father are 1one.”

**John 10:31**   The Jews apicked up stones again to stone Him. **32** Jesus answered them, “I showed you many good works from the Father; for which of them are you stoning Me?” **33** The Jews answered Him, “For a good work we do not stone You, but for ablasphemy; and because You, being a man, bmake Yourself God.” **34** Jesus answered them, “Has it not been written in ayour bLaw, ‘cI SAID, YOU ARE GODS’? **35** “If he called them gods, to whom the word of God came (and the Scripture cannot be broken), **36** do you say of Him, whom the Father asanctified and bsent into the world, ‘You are blaspheming,’ because I said, ‘cI am the Son of God’? **37** “aIf I do not do the works of My Father, do not believe Me; **38** but if I do them, though you do not believe Me, believe athe works, so that you may know and continue knowing that bthe Father is in Me, and I in the Father.” **39** Therefore athey were seeking again to seize Him, and bHe eluded their grasp.

**John 10:40**   And He went away aagain beyond the Jordan to the place where John was first baptizing, and He was staying there. **41** And many came to Him and were saying, “While John did no asign, yet beverything John said about this man was true.” **42** aAnd many believed in Him there.

#biblestudy/devotionals/john