# John 2 (ESV) 
***The Wedding at Cana***
*1 On the third day there was a wedding at Cana in Galilee, and the mother of Jesus was there. 2 Jesus also was invited to the wedding with his disciples. 3 When the wine ran out, the mother of Jesus said to him, “They have no wine.” 4 And Jesus said to her, “Woman, what does this have to do with me? My hour has not yet come.”*

There are explanations that explain the term "woman" as literal as it is used in English. It is explained then that in this situation Jesus is in a different position and the mother is now the servant of Jesus, the Son of God. Another explanation is similar, but translates this term as "Milady" or "Madam". 
Regardless of which, it is a very big difference with calling one "mother" as one usually does. The fact that Mary is not surprised that Jesus calls her this way, indicates that this was probably not the first time that Jesus addressed Mary as **woman**. However, this was the first miracle performed, according to John, and the explanation that Jesus' ministry had now began, is a correct one, which might also indicate a different attitude of Jesus now to his beloved ones—although I do believe He still has just a much love. 

Another part that struck me is when Jesus said: "**what does this have to do with me?**" which is very similar to when David told ... #todo/opzoeken/reference in 2 Samuel 26? concerning Shimei "What have I to do with you?" I am not sure if this an almost literal translation from a Hebrew idiom, but if it is, in English this would come across as "This does not concern me" and in David's case it would even imply something like "if you kill him, keep me out of it".


*5 His mother said to the servants, “Do whatever he tells you.”*

Three things strike me as strange. Jesus' answer seems to be a refusal to help out. Jesus is not like the lazy son in the parable #todo/opzoeken/reference in which the lazy son says he will not help his father, but eventually changes his mind and still does, for Jesus does not change His mind. Still, however, he helps out the master of the feast c.q. the married couple. 
The second thing is that the servants are willing to listen to a guest, who is even a woman. Now servants are named as such because they serve, even guests, but when is asked of them to use sanctified jars and to carry out a task to get—in my estimation—36 buckets of water from the well, and to be unavailable during this time to the other guests while there already is stress because they ran out of wine (note that they were not running out of wine, they had *already* run out), it is highly unlikely that they will do such a thing. Thirdly, why was the master of the feast not involved in this? He could have been partying himself at the time, being too busy and drunk to notice this, but he should have noticed there was no wine left, if even a guest such as Mary could notice this. He did not even bother to go downstairs to see where the servants were?
There are a few explanations to a few parts, but unfortunately I do not have the answer to everything. I only have one small explanation at this time. It has been implied by some commentators that this was likely a wedding of Jesus' family or of His disciples' family, in which case it would be more likely that family members have more say over the servants than mere guests. 

*6 Now there were six stone water jars there for the Jewish rites of purification, each holding twenty or thirty gallons. 7 Jesus said to the servants, “Fill the jars with water.” And they filled them up to the brim. 8 And he said to them, “Now draw some out and take it to the master of the feast.” So they took it. 9 When the master of the feast tasted the water now become wine, and did not know where it came from (though the servants who had drawn the water knew), the master of the feast called the bridegroom 10 and said to him, “Everyone serves the good wine first, and when people have drunk freely, then the poor wine. But you have kept the good wine until now.”*

Perhaps I am completely wrong about what the **master of the feast** is. I have been comparing this with the *master of ceremony* in present-day weddings. The master of ceremony should be aware of the program and that a special wine would be presented at the end of the wedding, if there were any. But the fact that the master of the feast is surprised about the wine is shocking to say the least. He was *supposed* to get the wine and supposed to know the wine ran out and to know where to get new wine. 

*1 This, the first of his signs, Jesus did at Cana in Galilee, and manifested his glory. And his disciples believed in him.*
*12 After this he went down to ::Capernaum::, with his mother and his brothers and his disciples, and they stayed there for a few days.*

***Jesus Cleanses the Temple***
*13 The Passover of the Jews was at hand, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem. 14 In the temple he found those who were selling oxen and sheep and pigeons, and the money-changers sitting there. 15 And making a whip of cords, he drove them all out of the temple, with the sheep and oxen. And he poured out the coins of the money-changers and overturned their tables. 16 And he told those who sold the pigeons, “Take these things away; do not make my Father's house a house of trade.” 17 His disciples remembered that it was written, “Zeal for your house will consume me.”*

The explanation of the context by Jim Cymbala #tags/famouspeople/christian is that people were allowed to sell and trade in the temple, because the people needed to buy their offerings and change their money for the right currency, however, they did not need to do it with a high markup, knowing that people who had come from far did not have any other place to buy these. In my view this is incorrect. The city of Israel provided enough space to buy or trade everything that was needed. Why should this happen **in the temple**?
A pastor-friend of mine preached on this topic last week and gave me insight in the symbolic lay-out of the temple. The #todo/opzoeken/engels voorhof outer court was the place for the gentiles to worship God. The Jews had been commissioned to be a light to the gentiles #todo/opzoeken/reference see God's command to Abraham. Now, however, this whole court was taken up by trade! This is a double trespass of God's Law—aside from trading in His temple, there now is no space nor peacefulness for the gentile to worship. 
This could also have been one of the reasons why Jesus—and later in Acts His disciples as well—were preaching and teaching in the Collonades of Solomon #todo/opzoeken  naam, namely because that might have been the area where His teaching would be of the least disturbance for those who wanted to pray and worship in silence. The collonades in the middle, between the courts for the women and the men. Aside from the fact that because men needed to cross through the women's court, so that Jesus' teaching would be heard by both men and women, this was also a place where there would possibly be a little more noise. This noise always happens when people have to be silent for a while. It is like one holding his breath, and at some point in time has to let go. We see this phenomenon in concerts and in church services. As soon as the sermon is over, people start silently—and sometimes even loudly!—mumbling or whispering. In classical music concerts, people will not necessarily talk, but they will start coughing. 
And so it would be very likely if men who walked silently through the women's court, could finally "breathe again" and start talking as soon as they reached the threshold between the two courts. 
Having this in mind then, it would be even more of a sin to simply barge into the court of the gentiles and not only speak loudly, but also trade there while gentiles were worshipping.

*18 So the Jews said to him, “What sign do you show us for doing these things?” 19 Jesus answered them, “Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up.” 20 The Jews then said, “It has taken forty-six years to build this temple, and will you raise it up in three days?” 21 But he was speaking about the temple of his body. 22 When therefore he was raised from the dead, his disciples remembered that he had said this, and they believed the Scripture and the word that Jesus had spoken.*

We need to wonder why no one stopped Jesus in doing such a thing. Of course there was the initial fear of seeing someone throwing around his whip. No one wanted to get hurt, but also no one wanted to be the first to go against this person. However, the temple guards would not have been afraid to arrest anyone causing a disturbance. 
In this case the *disturbance* should be defined differently. If everything was as quiet as in a library, a single sound could be deemed as a disturbance. A security guard could easily go there and stop the cause of that sound. However, in a concert or marketplace security guards act on a much higher threshold. When people start shouting or dancing guards will not even blink an eye. We can easily say that the temple guards were already used to the chaos of (Middle-Eastern) markets. Now Jesus' behavior was exceptional, even for guards at that time, but much less exceptional than if anyone would have done this is in the women's or men's court. 
In cinematic depictions of this scene we see Jesus doing this for a few seconds, at most a minute—in a minute it is possible to cause quite a lot of damage already—upon which someone asks Jesus why He is doing this or the quote in v.18. It is possible that Jesus did not turn over all of the stands, but only a part to make His statement. Then, after answering this question the people would know that they going against God's Law and no one would dare to arrest Him—of course this is also because it was not His time yet.

***Jesus Knows What Is in Man***
*23 Now when he was in Jerusalem at the Passover Feast, many believed in his name when they saw the signs that he was doing. 24 But Jesus on his part did not entrust himself to them, because he knew all people 25 and needed no one to bear witness about man, for he himself knew what was in man.*

Although this is only a short pericope, what is written here is very important. **Jesus [...] did not entrust himself to [those who] believed in his name**. Is this contradictory to what #todo/opzoeken/reference If you believe in the Name of Jesus and confess ... 
says? No, it is not. In ... it says that anyone who believes and confesses with mouth and with his heart, will be saved. 
First of all, the people in v.23 only did the first part. It says nothing about whether they had changed their ways and repented of their sin or even realized their sin. Second of all, they believed in **his name**. It is not defined here what *his name* means. Jesus had a big name, he was the one who performed miracles. I do not think He even had the name of being the Messiah yet. So the people had a very incomplete image, which is synonymous for *name*, of Jesus. Verse [ #todo/opzoeken/reference ] is referring to the Name of Jesus which includes His Godhood and His Messiah #todo/opzoeken/engels messias-schap? Messianic #todo/opzoeken/engels bestaat dit? ministry.  
It is necessary to understand what *the Name of Jesus* is and then believe in it as well, rationally, and then lastly, it needs to be believed "heartily", that is with the heart, meaning that there needs to be a full conviction, with a consequent following of surrender.

#biblestudy/devotionals/john