# John 16 (ESV)
*1 “I have said all these things to you to keep you from falling away. 2 They will put you out of the synagogues. Indeed, the hour is coming when whoever kills you will think he is offering service to God. 3 And they will do these things because they have not known the Father, nor me. 4 But I have said these things to you, that when their hour comes you may remember that I told them to you.*

Unlike Bart Ehrman #tags/famouspeople/critics who claims that persecution never happened on a large scale in the first centuries (Footnote: See for quotes from his book https://www.goodreads.com/work/quotes/55586951.) in his book #tags/books *The Triumph of Christianity*, we know of many stories and both in the first centuries all the way up to today where thousands of Christians have died as martyrs. Granted, the thousands of Christians dying each week in the period that Boko Haram invaded Central Africa and up to 200.000 Christians at a risk of massacre in Nigeria (Footnote: https://www.nbcnews.com/storyline/missing-nigeria-schoolgirls/boko-haram-200-000-christians-risk-massacre-nigeria-n306211) are but a fraction of the 1.5 billion Christians in the world (Footnote: Although a very large part of this number consists of traditional and not-reborn Christians.).  But even in the time that Christianity was small, such as during the [Boxer Rebellion](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boxer_Rebellion) in China in 1900 and the events preceding the [French expedition to Korea](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_expedition_to_Korea) in 1866 there was persecution among the Christians on scale never seen before. In Korea about 7,000 to 10,000 converts were killed (Footnote: https://web.archive.org/web/20070610142947/http://www.net4war.com/e-revue/dossiers/coree/Roze/roze03.htm)  while there were about 17,000 native Korean converts in 1856 and 23,000 in 1864 (Footnote: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_expedition_to_Korea) . 
In the Boxer rebellion the casualty number was even higher: 32,000 Christians and 200 Western missionaries (Footnote: Source: Hammond Atlas of the 20th century (1996).).
If these numbers have only grown higher, perhaps even percentage-wise compared to the time of the first-century Christians, then we can expect more and more devastating #todo/opzoeken/engels persecutions to come soon. 
However, it must be said that this characteristic of persecution seems to come *after* an exponential increase of the number of Christians. During the first days or weeks #todo/opzoeken after the first Pentecost there were 15,000 converts from the original 20 followers of Christ, which were His disciples and a few women. After a persecution by the Romans in that same year (I think #todo/opzoeken ) another rise was on its way through one of the persecutors, Paul. For thirty years he ministered in the mission and probably led many to believe as well, after which another persecution took place. 
What happened from there on I do not know, but has been recorded in history and I would need to dive deeper into that #todo/opzoeken , but in the last few hundred years we see the same pattern among others in the examples mentioned above of Korea and China. 
In the past two years we have seen this happening again in Africa, China and India where the growth of Christian converts has become exponential. In the West, unfortunately, this growth is stagnating, declining and possibly even negative so a great persecution is—according to this pattern at least—not expected here. 
#todo/opzoeken We need to look for what caused this growth. Persecution caused growth, and growth caused persecution. But what caused growth in areas where there was no persecution? Missionaries who were willing to give up their own career and personal life, is the red line in all of the stories of martyrs since and before Hudson Taylor #tags/famouspeople/christian/missionaries, not the missionary work of groups and relatively safe missions such as Mercy Ships in Liberia and Compassion all over the world. These have not shown the exponential results of past missionaries who were not part of a greater organization with funding and other support. 

***The Work of the Holy Spirit***
*“I did not say these things to you from the beginning, because I was with you. 5 But now I am going to him who sent me, and none of you asks me, ‘Where are you going?’*

Did Judas not ask Jesus earlier #todo/opzoeken where I am going to you cannot follow

*6 But because I have said these things to you, sorrow has filled your heart. 7 Nevertheless, I tell you the truth: it is to your advantage that I go away, for if I do not go away, the Helper will not come to you. But if I go, I will send him to you.*

Why can the Holy Spirit and Jesus not be on Earth at the same time? Most likely this is not because of a universal rule, but because of God's providence and plan. Just like the #todo/opzoeken/engels bedelingsleer states that there are separate periods in which God acts, in the same way God spoke to humanity through visions and through a temporary #todo/opzoeken/engels possession, landing of the Holy Spirit on people, then through Jesus as a person, and now through the Holy Spirit *permanently* residing in people. So in order to start one period the previous one needs to be closed. #biblestudy/questions
One may also wonder what the period is between Ascension and Pentecost. How did God speak or act in those ten days, in the same way as He did before Jesus' incarnation? 

*8 And when he comes, he will convict the world concerning sin and righteousness and judgment: 9 concerning sin, because they do not believe in me; 10 concerning righteousness, because I go to the Father, and you will see me no longer; 11 concerning judgment, because the ruler of this world is judged.*

As the Spirit of truth it is His "task" to convict the world of sin, righteousness and judgment. The truth is not merely a concept that defines whether something is or is not (true). In philosophy that might be the case, but in God's realm truth is an attribute of the Holy Spirit that needs to be brought to this world so that people will see and *accept* it, or see and *reject* it, but either way, they need to see it or choose not to see it, and suffer the consequences of their choice. Just like the Father brings forth righteousness through condemnation, so the Holy Spirit brings conviction through the truth. As righteousness is an attribute of God the Father, so truth is that of God the Holy Spirit. 
Truth works together with righteousness for righteousness is implemented when a person knows the truth and then acts on his knowledge of the truth. Without truth there is no righteousness nor justice. Truth (would thus) will then bring about conviction. To put this in more simple terms, righteousness is the state where victims are redeemed for their losses and victimizers are punished for their crimes, this also goes for doing good which is rewarded of course. The definition of "crime" and "doing good", however, depend on the truth of what these terms mean. So without this truth it cannot be said what righteousness is, for there is no standard. The punishment in turn, which comes through justice, cannot be applied because there is no righteousness. 
Now the word "conviction" means the state of being judged (in a court) or being convinced. Concerning sin then, those who do not believe in Jesus (but knew the truth) will be convinced that they need to be sent to hell. As for righteousness, those who love Jesus and do not want Him to leave will be convinced that He needs to be with the Father. As for judgment, the world needs to be convinced that the ruler of this world, that is the Satan, is (already) judged for all of his past and future sins. 
So Jesus says the Holy Spirit will convict the world of these three things. The first and third things are quite intuitive, that is the world needs to be (and has been) convicted that they are sinful and that they will be judged. The second thing, however, as explained in the paragraph above, seems to be unrelated to those. Perhaps this could be explained as follows. Jesus was here on Earth to show what righteousness is. Tax collectors should not be cast out, but should have a second chance, because some of them are willing to repent. Man of high stature should not be treated better, especially not the arrogant and boasting ones, for they have received their treasure already (cf. Matthew 6:1-7). Jesus showed many kinds of examples like these to His disciples and to the common people and *convinced* them of the righteousness that God spoke of, through the Holy Spirit within Him of course. When Jesus ascended, the Holy Spirit would continue to work, yet not through Jesus but through us. 
So in other words, because Jesus is not here anymore to show what righteousness is, therefore the Holy Spirit needs to come to show this. This also implies that we are not able to see this ourselves. 

*12 “I still have many things to say to you, but you cannot bear them now.*

There are some things we cannot bear. I do not think Jesus is saying this in the sense that we will be sad when we hear that Jesus is going to be crucified or leave us, for He did so and did tell His disciples about these things, but rather that some things might let some not yet converted people lose the little faith they had in Christ. Persecution is not one of those things for Jesus already mentioned these and let many of His "disciples" go away, just like He let the rich young man go away and the one who wanted to bury his father ( #todo/opzoeken/reference ). But there are things, perhaps even more horrible than persecution, that will be unbearable. These things are so cruel or vile—I honestly do not know and cannot imagine what this is, perhaps a description of hell—that merely *hearing* them will be unbearable to us. 

*13 When the Spirit of truth comes, he will guide you into all the truth, for he will not speak on his own authority, but whatever he hears he will speak, and he will declare to you the things that are to come.*

The Holy Spirit only speaks the truth, but that does not mean that He will tell everything. Some things we cannot bear and some things are not for us to know at this time or at all. The Holy Spirit speaks on the Father's and the Son's authority and whatever He hears either of them saying, He will tell us. 

*14 He will glorify me, for he will take what is mine and declare it to you.*

One way to glorify Jesus is by declaring what He has said. The Holy Spirit does exactly this. He takes no more words and no less than what Jesus said and declares it to us and He does it truthfully. How blessed in the man who speaks of Jesus' Words and does not add to it or subtracts from it. But how wicked and pitiful is the man who does do so (cf. Revelation 22:18). 

*15 All that the Father has is mine; therefore I said that he will take what is mine and declare it to you.*

#biblestudy/theology/trinity This is another example of the Trinity showing that Jesus is on the same level as the Father but that each has different roles. In this verse specifically Jesus claims that everything the Father has, is His—which is *a lot*. Jesus could not make this claim unless He claimed to be God Himself.

***Your Sorrow Will Turn into Joy***
*16 “A little while, and you will see me no longer; and again a little while, and you will see me.” 17 So some of his disciples said to one another, “What is this that he says to us, A little while, and you will not see me, and again a little while, and you will see me’; and, because I am going to the Father’?” 18 So they were saying, “What does he mean by ‘a little while’? We do not know what he is talking about.” 19 Jesus knew that they wanted to ask him, so he said to them, “Is this what you are asking yourselves, what I meant by saying, ‘A little while and you will not see me, and again a little while and you will see me’? 20 Truly, truly, I say to you, you will weep and lament, but the world will rejoice. You will be sorrowful, but your sorrow will turn into joy. 21 When a woman is giving birth, she has sorrow because her hour has come, but when she has delivered the baby, she no longer remembers the anguish, for joy that a human being has been born into the world.*

The analogy of a woman giving birth is amazing for it encompasses all the different aspects of sorrow and joy, and from the perspective of the sorrowful person and that of the bystanders. The woman has sorrow because of her pain, but after that will no longer remember the anguish. Yes, she will have the experience in her memory, but she will not feel the pain again anymore. In the same way the disciples do not remember the anguish of seeing Jesus on the cross; they have this experience in their memories, but they do not feel the pain, but rather the joy of His resurrection. The following is my own extrapolation of this analogy and probably is not what Jesus meant. The bystanders or relatives of the woman, on the other hand, are joyful because they know the newborn is coming, but when it comes it is covered in blood and not merely as beautiful as they expect babies to be. As for Jesus' death and resurrection, the world was rejoicing because of His death, but their joy turned into sorrow as soon as they realized that the crucifixion meant their own deaths (cf. 1 Corinthians 1:23), for they had crucified the only One Who could have saved them from eternal wrath (cf. John 3:36).

*22 So also you have sorrow now, but I will see you again, and your hearts will rejoice, and no one will take your joy from you. 23 In that day you will ask nothing of me. Truly, truly, I say to you, whatever you ask of the Father in my name, he will give it to you. 24 Until now you have asked nothing in my name. Ask, and you will receive, that your joy may be full.*

So until now the disciple had asked nothing in Jesus' Name and on the day that Jesus would see them again (I suppose that is in heaven) they will not ask Jesus anything again anymore. Perhaps the disciple did not ask for anything, because they were *with* Jesus. ::Whenever one is with Jesus he does not need anything.:: The disciples were certain of their food and shelter and even when they were sent out, they probably had some comfort from all they had seen from Jesus. They had walked by then perhaps two years already with Jesus without a fixed place to sleep, without a fixed income and other comforts and they had experienced how God provided. In heaven of course it will even be better because they will be closer to Jesus and the Father and they will be in the Father's house, where nothing is lacking. #church/material

***I Have Overcome the World***
*25 “I have said these things to you in figures of speech. The hour is coming when I will no longer speak to you in figures of speech but will tell you plainly about the Father. 26 In that day you will ask in my name, ::and I do not say to you that I will ask the Father on your behalf::; 27 for the Father himself loves you, because you have loved me and have believed that I came from God. 28 I came from the Father and have come into the world, and now I am leaving the world and going to the Father.”*

#biblestudy/questions Because of Jesus' death we have been justified and credited righteousness, that is the righteousness we are to have in heaven because Jesus paid for all of our current debts and the now incurred ones until the moment we die, we can presently enjoy among others through the direct contact to and speaking with the Father. We still have to ask in Jesus' Name, because the Father will do whatever the Son asks Him—asking in Jesus's name does not mean asking not on behalf of Jesus, but we are effectively asking what Jesus wants—but we do not have to ask Jesus Himself anymore, because we can speak and ask the Father directly. That is why we ask the Father and end our prayers with "In Jesus' Name I pray." #todo/opzoeken 

*29 His disciples said, “Ah, now you are speaking plainly and not using figurative speech! 30 Now we know that you know all things and do not need anyone to question you; this is why we believe that you came from God.” 31 Jesus answered them, “Do you now believe? 32 Behold, the hour is coming, indeed it has come, when you will be scattered, each to his own home, and will leave me alone. Yet I am not alone, for the Father is with me.*

#biblestudy/questions Is Jesus speaking of the evening before His crucifixion when all of His disciples scattered? Peter and another disciple did not go to their own home, but they scattered indeed and did not resist Jesus' arrest. 
Then, Jesus says He is not alone because the Father is with Him, but the Father had left Him on the cross. Was it only near the end that the Father left His Son and only for the short while when Jesus cried out "Father, why hast thou forsaken me?" until His last breath?  

*33 I have said these things to you, that in me you may have peace. In the world you will have tribulation. But take heart; I have overcome the world.”*

Jesus did not say these things, that is that He is not alone, so much as to inform us, but to put as at ease. On the one hand He warns us of what is coming, we will have tribulation, but on the other hand we may know that Jesus never acts alone, the Father is always with Him. 
On top of that Jesus also tells us that He has (already) overcome the world, even before His Resurrection. Jesus knows already that He is stronger than death and what would happen if He were to be put to death, but His words are not based on His foreknowledge, for that would not justify the use of the present perfect. Jesus can say this, because He is God Himself and God lives outside of time. 

#biblestudy/devotionals/john #tags/events/ascension #tags/events/pentecost