# John 20 (ESV)  
***The Resurrection***
*1 Now on the first day of the week Mary Magdalene came to the tomb early, while it was still dark, and saw that the stone had been taken away from the tomb. 2 So she ran and went to Simon Peter and the other disciple, the one whom Jesus loved, and said to them, “They have taken the Lord out of the tomb, and we do not know where they have laid him.”*

#todo/opzoeken Who knew what Jesus meant when Jesus said He would be resurrected after three days? Apparently none of His disciples because the women were still thinking that "they", perhaps the Pharisees, had taken the body. Or it was that at this very moment they did not realize it. See also the notes at v.10. 

***Just a thought*** What does *resurrect* mean? It is a verb that is either active or passive, but in the active case it requires an object. Jesus can resurrect others, but He did not say: "After three days I will resurrect Myself." but rather that He would be resurrected. In fact, I do not even remember that He said this, but only that He said that He would rise from the dead #todo/opzoeken  or did He said that He would be *raised* from the dead? 
For if He were to be resurrected, Who would resurrect Him then? The Father *wills* it, *through the power* of the Holy Spirit, but it is the Son Who *does* this, so He would still be actively resurrecting Himself and the passive form as in "be resurrected" would not be correct. So He did not say this or it is not correctly translated. 

*3 So Peter went out with the other disciple, and they were going toward the tomb. 4 Both of them were running together, but the other disciple outran Peter and reached the tomb first. 5 And stooping to look in, he saw the linen cloths lying there, but he did not go in. 6 Then Simon Peter came, following him, and went into the tomb. He saw the linen cloths lying there, 7 and the face cloth, which had been on Jesus' head, not lying with the linen cloths but folded up in a place by itself. 8 Then the other disciple, who had reached the tomb first, also went in, and he saw and believed; 9 for as yet they did not understand the Scripture, that he must rise from the dead. 10 Then the disciples went back to their homes.*

Note that before entering the tomb they did not believe. They believed that Jesus was the Son of God, because Peter had already said this and because God told him this, although we could also question whether only knew this or whether he actually believed it. They also believed that Jesus could do miracles, but still they did not understand that He would rise from the dead. Some of them did not understand that He would die perhaps, except for Mary (or was it Martha #todo/opzoeken ), the sister of Lazarus, but none of them knew, not even the women, that He would rise up again. Perhaps Jesus was not clear about this. He did tell them about the kernel that had to die, but He also said that it was in order to have new life and bear more fruit. 
As mentioned before by Jesus, perhaps Jesus spoke in parables so that even His disciples would not be able to understand everything until the given time, which was now. 
It is not only that they did not understand Jesus' prophecies, they also did not understand Scripture, as v.9 says. Somewhere else #todo/opzoeken  we have read that the Holy Spirit would bring Scripture and Jesus' words into remembrance, which is logical, because normal people would not be able to memorize everything from Scripture and memorize everything a person said, especially if this person was Jesus Who gave long sermons every day. And even if they had memorized the whole Old Testament, such as the Pharisees had, then still would not be able to connect the dots with the prophecies and the current events without the Holy Spirit's insight. But now it is not speaking of remembering, but *understanding* Scripture, which they did not even did up until this point. 
It is only the Holy Spirit that can make someone understand the Scripture, no matter whether it is written in a simple language such as the *(T)NIV* or even in a paraphrased version such as *The Message*. Once again I want to refer to Bart Ehrman #tags/famouspeople/critics who has read the Bible with an open mind, even studied Theology and then "fell off" of his faith—which to me personally means that he was never in the faith, because God will let no one fall—simply because he never understood the Bible. Apparently the Holy Spirit did not work in him because either he never proclaimed Jesus' Name with all of his heart #todo/opzoeken waar staat deze zin in de Bijbel? (o.a. 1 John 4:15)
upon which God promises that they will have eternal life, or he was simply not chosen by God, which could mean, depending on the theology one follows, that he did confess Jesus, but that it was unheard by God, or that he did not confess Jesus *with all of his heart* because he could not because he never received the strength and will from God to do that. For even calling upon the Name of Jesus requires stength from the Holy Spirit, for no one can call if he has not sought, and no one can seek God because the Bible says so #todo/opzoeken for there is none that seek God. 

It is also very noticeable that John did not believe when he merely saw the linen cloths from the outside of the tomb. What was it that made him believe that Jesus had risen? Perhaps it was the face cloth and that is *folded up*, which probably was somewhere out of sight from the entrance of the tomb. Any person who would steal a body would not go through the hassle to unwrap Jesus' linen cloths but most certainly they would not fold up the face cloth. 
What is also striking is that John believed, but it does not say exactly *what* he (and Peter) believed. Perhaps they believed Jesus had risen, but if that is the case, why would they then not believe Mary who told them and the other disciples that she had seen them nor the two people from Emmaus (see Mark 16:11-14). Only when Jesus Himself came into the room did they believe (except for Thomas, who believed a little later). Could it be that the "they" referred to in Mark 16 refers to all disciples except for John and Peter? 
There is a possibility that that is true according to Luke 24:16 where Mary Magdalene (and the other women not mentioned here in John) went to the eleven disciples (there were more people present though (see Luke 24:9,33)). There it says that "they" did not believe the women, with the exception of Peter (and John, though not mentioned there, who ran after Peter). So the "they" could refer to almost all of the eleven. On the other hand it could be that both Peter and John did not believe the women, but were the only ones who took action in order to find out. 

So the chronological order and facts that I can derive from all these narratives of the Resurrection are as follows.
* Multiple women, among whom Mary Magdalene, visit the tomb and go *inside* and see two men (angels) and all of them return to tell the eleven plus others. 
* All of them did not believe the women, but Peter, John and at least Mary Magdalene went back to the tomb. Peter went in first, then John, but Mary stayed outside. Peter and John believed, although it is uncertain what they believed, and returned to the "house", but Mary stayed *outside* of the tomb. 
* Jesus then appears to Mary and she returns to the eleven in the room to tell them she saw Him, but they (most likely all of the disciples but perhaps with the exception of Peter and John) did not believe her. (Mark 16:11 (but this part could be wrong, because it was added later into the Bible. It would be strange that even Peter and John would not believe her after they had the face cloth neatly folded.)
* Then Jesus appeared to the two people heading towards Emmaus, who after seeing Jesus returned to Jerusalem to tell the disciples who again did not believe them. 
* Lastly, Jesus returned to the room to His disciples, except Thomas, who joined later, and during the meal He rebuked them.

#todo/nogaftemaken Practical application. We need to go *into* the tomb before we can *believe* and *understand* Scripture. We need take the step (research) and see the proof, then we will believe and after believing the Holy Spirit comes and will make us understand.   #church/material

***Jesus Appears to Mary Magdalene***
*11 But Mary stood weeping outside the tomb, and as she wept she stooped to look into the tomb. 12 And she saw two angels in white, sitting where the body of Jesus had lain, one at the head and one at the feet. 13 They said to her, “Woman, why are you weeping?” She said to them, “They have taken away my Lord, and I do not know where they have laid him.” 14 Having said this, she turned around and saw Jesus standing, but she did not know that it was Jesus. 15 Jesus said to her, “Woman, why are you weeping? Whom are you seeking?” Supposing him to be the gardener, she said to him, “Sir, if you have carried him away, tell me where you have laid him, and I will take him away.” 16 Jesus said to her, “Mary.” She turned and said to him in Aramaic, “Rabboni!” (which means Teacher). 17 Jesus said to her, “Do not cling to me, for I have not yet ascended to the Father; but go to my brothers and say to them, I am ascending to my Father and your Father, to my God and your God.’”*

It seems to be as if Jesus is not very understanding of Mary's emotions here. Of course He is, but He is prioritizing the needs of others as well. The brothers, His disciples, were mourning as well and the joy of Mary (and a few other women as well) alone would not compensate for the mourning of the brothers and all of His other followers. So merely after one word "Rabboni" and perhaps a hug or a holding of Jesus' hand by Mary, Jesus already gives her a command. 
This is also a good example of a result-oriented personality 
#church/courses/disc

*18 Mary Magdalene went and announced to the disciples, “I have seen the Lord”—and that he had said these things to her.*

***Jesus Appears to the Disciples***
*19 On the evening of that day, the first day of the week, the doors being locked where the disciples were for fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood among them and said to them, “Peace be with you.”*

Perhaps Jesus literally meant peace because the disciples did not have that at this moment. They were probably afraid of the Jews for if they had the power to execute an innocent person with false testimonies, they surely could arrest and execute the disciples as well. 
The disciples also did not have peace because they had no leader, as the Psalm foretold #todo/opzoeken  that the flock would be like without their shepherd. For where would one go if the leader has gone? It is just like with cults or other followings, such as Bruce Lee #tags/famouspeople who started his own martial arts philosophy *Jeet Kune Do* which was supposedly the best form of martial arts which could defeat any other martial art—and Bruce Lee was undefeated until his death indeed but regardless of how good the art was, most of his disciples left this philosophy turned ideology almost as soon as their leader passed away and now almost nothing is known of this sport anymore. 
It is only when the leader is still present that its followers can follow him. Perhaps one may ask, but will the disciples never become masters in themselves, such as karate and other martial arts dojos have their own masters and grandmasters? Was the case with Jeet Kune Do not that Bruce Lee had not sufficiently taught his students? 
The problem with karate and all others martial arts is that they stopped developing. Originating from China, some Japanese guy took Karate and developed it further, just like the other martials such as Tae Kwon Do, Hapkido and Aikido have developed from an original martial art in China and even this one is said to have been developed from an Indian root martial art. The founder of Japanese karate has developed his philosophy but his students have not continued developing it, neither have the other martial arts. Bruce Lee was an exception in that he continued developing it, but the same stagnation in development happened to his art when he died. 
Jesus has said that a disciple will never become the master (Footnote: There is a Chinese saying for a student becoming even greater than his master, but that applies for a normal teacher-student relation and only in some fields. It cannot be applied to the founders of great philosophies of arts, literature etc. No one, for example would say that he is a better philosopher than Confucius, Aristotle, Socrates or Kant, and no martial artist, even if stronger, would say he is better than Bruce Lee.). So what about Christianity? Jesus rose again after He died and therefore He is still here and His work, which is that we believe in Christ (see John 6:29) is still being carried out. Is Christianity ever evolving then? It has evolved from the Old Testament to the New Testament and *people*, so not Christ Himself, have changed some parts of the faith for the good or for the bad. Roman-Catholicism is an example of something really bad that happened to the faith while the gathering of Christians in church buildings (additionally to house groups) and all kinds of organized activities "might" be something good (that is at least what I think). All the bad things come from people, but that good things are given by the Holy Spirit, so in this sense there is some evolving. 
Big evolutions, however, are not seen here because Christianity is an exception to the rule in that Jesus created a perfect philosophy on Christianity, the Church and the Word, which are revealed to us in bits over time, but is perfect nonetheless. 

*20 When he had said this, he showed them his hands and his side. Then the disciples were glad when they saw the Lord. 21 Jesus said to them again, “Peace be with you.*

Why would Jesus have said this twice? Is this saying not something like "hello" or 你好 (ní hao, which literally means "It goes well with you" (either as statement or as question), but should actually be translated as "how are you doing?") in Chinese? Should I interpret this part then as "Hello" and after the disciples did not answer, probably because they were stunned, He showed His hands and His side and said "hello." #biblestudy/questions
Most likely Jesus did not merely say the word "peace" as a "hello" but He really meant for the disciples to have peace. Perhaps we can take Jesus words literally and very specifically even up to the level that when He says "peace" He does not mean the peace of this world but of heaven. Even the original languages (Hebrew, Greek, Aramaic) are not specific enough to capture God's words and in this case, John as the author, wrote this down in the only possible way, which is in human language. Of course he could have used more words to explain what Jesus meant, and he sometimes does, but not here. 

*As the Father has sent me, even so I am sending you.” 22 And when he had said this, he breathed on them and said to them, “Receive the Holy Spirit.*

This is the crucial part. Jesus had been sent to this world to Evangelize and to be an example of what heaven is like and what God looks like. Now, and exactly now that Jesus had risen and not even after a real introduction or explanation of what happened, how He got here, how He is feeling Jesus just starts off with: "Now it is your turn." The disciples barely had time to comprehend what happened. They were mourning, even though it had been the two or three days already (Footnote: See this #todo/opzoeken for an explanation of the number of days and nights between Jesus' death and Resurrection and on which day of the week He was crucified.), and they were in shock of suddenly seeing their Lord alive and now they received the shocking message of undergoing the same thing themselves! #church/material 
They received the Holy Spirit for *this reason*: to go *out* and to go *all out*. Jesus went all the way to His death and further in order to set the example for His disciples. Now His disciples can do the same and when they have done so, they cannot tell their disciples themselves, because they will not be on Earth then but in heaven. However, each disciple will point to Jesus' example and that their own example is only an attempt at that which Jesus had done.
Remember that it was only *after* they had received the Holy Spirit that they started to go out and produce results. They could have gone out sooner, but first of all that would be disobedience to Jesus Who told them to wait, and second of all they would not have had any conversions because it is only the Holy Spirit Who can work in people's hearts. 
How then did Jesus convert people if the Holy Spirit had not descended yet? Jesus could command the Holy Spirit to work in any person He wanted to and He (i.e. the Holy Spirit) *has* worked in Mary of Magdalene and Lazarus and most notably in Jesus' disciples. The disciples would not be able to do so on their own, because they did not have any authority in and of themselves. But even when the Great Commission was given to them in Matthew 28:19 to go out, they still did not have the power of the Holy Spirit until ten days later at Pentecost.

*23 If you forgive the sins of any, they are forgiven them; if you withhold forgiveness from any, it is withheld.”*

#biblestudy/questions
This is one of the more difficult questions to answer. First of all, how can the disciples have the same authority as Jesus to forgive people? Second of all, how can any forgiveness be withheld? Is it not a promise that anyone who repents and calls on the name of the Lord and asks for forgiveness will be forgiven? #todo/opzoeken 
Lastly, is this promise only meant for the disciples or is it meant for all Christians? #todo/nogaftemaken 

***Jesus and Thomas***
*24 Now Thomas, one of the twelve, called the Twin, was not with them when Jesus came. 25 So the other disciples told him, “We have seen the Lord.” But he said to them, “Unless I see in his hands the mark of the nails, and place my finger into the mark of the nails, and place my hand into his side, I will never believe.”*
*26 Eight days later, his disciples were inside again, and Thomas was with them. Although the doors were locked, Jesus came and stood among them and said, “Peace be with you.” 27 Then he said to Thomas, “Put your finger here, and see my hands; and put out your hand, and place it in my side. Do not disbelieve, but believe.” 28 Thomas answered him, “My Lord and my God!” 29 Jesus said to him, “Have you believed because you have seen me? Blessed are those who have not seen and yet have believed.”*

Thomas withdrew his words after seeing. Fortunately this was not some kind of swearing. 
Thomas did not even need to do as he told anymore and forgot all about putting his finger into the mark of the nails. Thinking about it, this was quite a disrespectful thing to say. Jesus allowed Thomas to put his fingers into the marks and his hand in His side, that would be *inside* of Jesus' body. I cannot imagine putting my hand inside of a prominent person without disrespecting him, but Jesus even allowed it—although He knew that Thomas would forfeit on his words. 
So Thomas believed without touching, but with seeing, but blessed even more are those who believe without seeing. #todo/nogaftemaken 

***The Purpose of This Book***
*30 Now Jesus did many other signs in the presence of the disciples, which are not written in this book; 31 but these are written so that you may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that by believing you may have life in his name.*

#biblestudy/devotionals/john


- [ ] differences between Gospel narratives of Peter's denial of Jesus, Johannes 12
- [ ] #todo/opzoeken  books of the Bible that cannot be preached in China
#todo Gwendolyn vragen: hulp bij opruimen na Step Study Groups van mannen i.p.v. vrouwen zodat de vrouwen iets langer kunnen doorgaan. 

Marriage Day: 
* Niet vaak complimenten geven aan mij. Mij erkenning geven en verhogen
* voorbeelden van: mij verkleinen. Vergeetachtigheid van mij en Nathan.

#tags/events/pentecost