# John 1 (ESV) 
***The Word Became Flesh***
*1 In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. 2 He was in the beginning with God. 3 All things were made through him, and without him was not any thing made that was made. 4 In him was life, and the life was the light of men. 5 The light shines in the darkness, and the darkness has not overcome it.*

There are a few perspectives on this part. Most people learn in church that this part is written to make clear that Jesus, Who is the **Word**, existed from the very **beginning** and that Jesus *is* God. #todo/opzoeken  references to Jesus claiming He is the Word. However, if this Gospel was written to the world, where many did not know Jesus nor His claims of being the Word of God, these verses would not make much sense. Of course v.14 makes clear that the Word is Jesus Himself, but there could still be things that are not completely clear—just like many people read the Bible today, even in their easier translations or paraphrases and still do not understand the Bible. 
Then there was another problem, because **the Word** also referred to another "entity", if you will, perhaps not a being, but a *something* that contained and provided all things concerning the ratio #todo/opzoeken , which the Greeks called *the Word*. John then said there is indeed such a thing, but that this thing was not created, but it **was with God, and the Word was God**. John *adds* to this, however, that this Word also created **all things**, that is the material things. Even more so, it created **life**, and the Greeks were very clear on the difference between materials—a concept of atoms, for example, which were neither dead nor alive, nor did they contain life—and the concept of living matter which did contain life. Lastly, the Word also created ethics and moral standards, that is it created goodness and v.5 claims that it *is* good. 
In all, there is a stark contrast between the Greek gods and the God of the Israelites. The Greeks (Footnote: and actually every religion related to this, all the way back to the Canaanite god Baal (and perhaps Mammon, #todo/opzoeken  relationship with Baal?), the Egyptian gods (Seth, Isis, etc) and the Assyrian and Babylonian Ishtar and Astarte, respectively ( #todo/opzoeken volgorde), and in the future the Roman gods and Catholic *idols* where the saints are figures of the former religions' gods) claimed that there were many gods which each were responsible for an element of nature. Gaia was the one who created nature, and Zeus created humans #todo/opzoeken klopt dit? but no god created life. Perhaps Gaia manipulated materials into making them Earth and its surrounding planets, but no god created the materials to begin with. And although Pallas Athena was wise, no god created wisdom or moral values. Even the first gods were not there at the beginning. Before the Olympian gods, i.e. Zeus and his siblings, there were their predecessors, which are the Titans, which in turn also have their predecessors. No one knows or can explain the beginning of the gods. 
In the movie #tags/movies *Guardians of the Galaxy, Vol. II* Kurt Russell #tags/famouspeople/actors plays the role of a Celestial, a kind of god in the Marvel Universe, named Ego, who was from the beginning of time, but did not even know about himself when he was created, by whom, or why he existed. In short, he is a "god" with many limitations in knowledge and power, and killed by a bunch of mortal aliens in the end of the movie. This is often the image man creates of their god—a god that looks like man with limitations in every field but having just a little bit more power. (See also the limitations of the Greek gods who live in the Tartarus.) Why does man create these images for himself, while the true God of Israel created man in *His* image? 
It is ironic, though, because on the one hand man wanted to become like God, from the very beginning (see Genesis 2 about Adam and Eve and Genesis 5 #todo/opzoeken/reference  about Babel). On the other hand, though, they take all kinds of measures to limit the gods and put them in boxes with supernatural boundaries, along with a lack of selfcontrol in lust, anger, wrath and patience among others. They do not want an all-powerful, all-mighty, all-knowing, all-self-controlled god, because that would mean that the contrast to the capabilities of their beings would be starker. It would show more obviously how wicked man is. For the same reason man has never created an all-loving and all-righteous God and all of the other attributes of Yahweh. They were able to submit to a god who is more powerful than them, but not to one who is infinitely more righteous than them. They do this because the dark cannot stand the light. 
This is clearly shown in Hosea as well, where his wife Gomer could not accept the love Hosea showed her, and ran off #todo/opzoeken film hierover? **Example.** Misschien Michael Douglas' daughter in *Traffic*. #todo/nogaftemaken Maar ook die ene film over dochter die mogelijk ontvoerd was en in de porno-industrie werd geleid, waarbij uiteindelijk na haar "redding" bleek dat ze het vrijwillig deed uit opstandigheid om aandacht te krijgen die ze al die jaren had gemist van haar vader. (Niet helemaal het juiste voorbeeld.) 
For the same reason they do not want to have an all-knowing God because He would be able to know everything on their minds. The Greek gods were always limited and did not know what other gods were up to, or what humans were even thinking, giving mankind a little bit of leeway here. 
This is also shown in the world religions that I know of—and probably will be true for all other religions. Take for example Islam (Footnote: We do not even need to look at Buddhism and Hinduism. Buddhism has no gods, except the "evolved" Chinese and perhaps the Japanese versions of Buddhism, and Hinduism's Shiva and Kali already show their weaknesses in the forms of incapability to find a son's head (see the story of Ganesha, who lost his head and instead was given an elephant's head) and Kali, who cannot control her lust and is constantly on a killing spree. This, unfortunately, is shown in the worship of her as well, by the bloodshed and the sacrifices to her, and perhaps also in the behavior of those who worship her), Allah is depicted there as an almighty and all-knowing God, but there is no sign of love in the Qur'an. #tags/religion/islam For how could an all-loving and all-righteous god allow his prophet to behave in the way he did, for example by killing his enemies and taking over their wives (or perhaps killing them *because* he wanted their wives), taking young children as their bride and raping a woman out in the open (Footnote: It was in the open, but he did order the men to turn their backs so they would not be able to see his act.) merely because he could not control his sexual needs. This is a complete opposite of prophets like Hosea, Jeremiah and Ezekiel who had to live controlled lives in humble servitude of God. 

*6 There was a man sent from God, whose name was John. 7 He came as a witness, to bear witness about the light, that all might believe through him. 8 He was not the light, but came to bear witness about the light.*
*9 The true light, which gives light to everyone, was coming into the world. 10 He was in the world, and the world was made through him, yet the world did not know him. 11 He came to his own, and his own people did not receive him.*

It is ironic to see that the whole world worships the *image* of something and when that *something* actually appears, the world does **not know** it. He is the creator and the creation does not acknowledge nor know the creator. He is part of their family and they do not **receive** it. 
World's best football (soccer) player Cristiano Ronaldo (at least in the past decades) once disguised himself with make-up, old clothes and a beard, pretending to be a street artist performing football tricks. People did not play football with him and a girl he asked for a phone number refused to give it to him. 
This was expected, of course, because people do not actually like Ronaldo for his football skills, but rather for his status. This is also shown by the example of Harrison Ford who can walk on the streets without any problems—at least in his later years. He said of himself that sometimes people on the streets tell him they find him a great actor and then walk on. This is because his star status is gone, even though his skills are still there and perhaps have even been honed. 
On the other hand, if Ronaldo were to actually be among the people without disguise, the people would soon find him boring as well, because he is normal, just one like us, who also has fits of rage, weaknesses and illnesses. He would not be the super star as we know him, in the morning after a short night's rest. 
Perhaps this can be compared with how Jesus came into the world. He came as a human being and people saw his weaknesses and could not worship Him. But when He came as a God, providing the **true light** and telling the people of what it really meant to follow Him, and that it would cost them their lives, many people left him. 
People want to have an image of something that is perfect to *them*. Nothing too holy but still attainable.
#todo/nogaftemaken  misschien een stukje plaatsen over als Ronaldo zou zeggen hoe hard hij moet trainen voor dit alles, dat mensen hem dan ook minder bewonderen. Mensen willen niet volgen als ze zelf ook zo hard hun best moeten doen. Ze kiezen altijd de gemakkelijkste weg. Ook in het geval van religie, prosperity bijvoorbeeld, en vergeving en word of faith. 
Summarizing, a testimony about the true light will lead many people to follow. When the true light comes, they do not follow. An image of this light, however, they would follow, but if this light becomes one of them, they do not deem it worth to follow. 

*12 But to all who did receive him, who believed in his name, he gave the right to become children of God, 13 who were born, not of blood nor of the will of the flesh nor of the will of man, but of God.*

v.13 here is referring to the previous verse, that is **all who did receive him**. *All* of these people are **of God**. We have often heard of this term, used in phrases such *man of God*, but what this term really means is that they are **born** of God. John explains here that people are born in three ways: (1) of blood (2) of the will of the flesh (3) of the will of man. The **will of the flesh** clearly indicates those who were born because at least one of their parents had sexual lust and **the will of man** refers to those wanted to have children (cf. Judah who had sex with Tamar out of lust, and Tamar who did this to have a child). However, what would **born of blood** mean? This is probably speaking of our nature, since all men are made of blood. v.13 should then be interpreted poetically as an A-B-B-A statement, where those born of the blood are  opposed to those born of God, and where the B-statements are the two possible ways a person is born. 
Another interpretation—although more rare, but in my view more fitting—is that this is an A-A-A-B statement, where the A-statements indicate what is not, and B states what *is*. The first A-statement about being **born [...] of blood** then means that one needs offspring to set forth his *blood* line. This is like what Tamar did, but not completely, for she could have done this not only for reasons of continuing the blood line but also for her own financial wellbeing in order to be able to inherit the property of her late husband Er (Genesis 38). A better example of being born of the will of man would then be someone who is childless, such as Hannah (1 Samuel 1 #todo/opzoeken  ) or Rachel. 

*14 And the Word became flesh and dwelt among us, and we have seen his glory, glory as of the only Son from the Father, full of grace and truth. 15 (John bore witness about him, and cried out, “This was he of whom I said, He who comes after me ranks before me, because he was before me.’”) 16 For from his fullness we have all received, grace upon grace. 17 For the law was given through Moses; grace and truth came through Jesus Christ. 18 No one has ever seen God; the only God, who is at the Father's side, he has made him known.*

The **seen** in v.14 is explained by the reception in v.16, and the reception is proven by the fact that **grace and truth** came after the **law [of] Moses**. God did not *have* to use a way out. He could have kept the Law and used that as a way of getting to heaven, but He provided grace by letting His Son die on the cross. The second grace in v.16, which is **upon grace**—provided this is literally meant as a second **grace upon** the first grace and not meant symbolically—refers to the fact that God sent His Son to Earth to show us the **Father** which **no one has ever seen** (cf. v.18). 

#biblestudy/questions Has Adam not seen God when He walked with him? Probably that was also God hidden in some kind of disguise, such as when God showed His "back" to Moses. 

***The Testimony of John the Baptist***
*19 And this is the testimony of John, when the Jews sent priests and Levites from Jerusalem to ask him, “Who are you?” 20 He confessed, and did not deny, but confessed, “I am not the Christ.” 21 And they asked him, “What then? Are you Elijah?” He said, “I am not.” “Are you the Prophet?” And he answered, “No.” 22 So they said to him, “Who are you? We need to give an answer to those who sent us. What do you say about yourself?” 23 He said, “I am the voice of one crying out in the wilderness, ‘Make straight the way of the Lord,’ as the prophet Isaiah said.”*
*24 (Now they had been sent from the Pharisees.) 25 They asked him, “Then why are you baptizing, if you are neither the Christ, nor Elijah, nor the Prophet?” 26 John answered them, “I baptize with water, but among you stands one you do not know, 27 even he who comes after me, the strap of whose sandal I am not worthy to untie.” 28 These things took place in Bethany across the Jordan, where John was baptizing.*

The **priests and Levites** who were **sent from the Pharisees** asked John why he was baptizing if he was neither the **Christ**, **Elijah** nor the **Prophet**. Actually Elijah was the typological image of John, but John did not need to tell them that, with Elisha being the typology of Jesus Christ. Most likely, however, the delegates thought that Elijah would return in the flesh, and John did not want to go into a theological discussion with them about this nor give them an explanation on typology for the focus he wanted the focus not to be on him or on theology, but on Christ, who was not only to come, but had already come, since Christ was **among** them.

What would John have meant with **one you do not know**? Surely the delegates had heard of the Messiah. This could have meant two things in my view: (1) the delegates had not met Jesus before (or they did not recognize Him in the crowd) or (2) the delegates know about the foretold Messiah, but had a different view of him. John knew that the Pharisees and Scribes' view on the Messiah was a political figure, just like most if not all (orthodox) Jews these days have—such as Ben Shapiro #tags/famouspeople who openly mentioned this in an interview with John MacArthur #tags/famouspeople/christian —who could be any man, even one who exists now already, but is still to bring about a radical (political) change in the world. 

***Behold, the Lamb of God***
*29 The next day he saw Jesus coming ::toward:: him, and said, “Behold, the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world! 30 This is he of whom I said, After me comes a man who ranks before me, because he was before me.’ 31 I myself did not know him, but for this purpose I came baptizing with water, ::that:: he might be revealed to Israel.”*

There are some theories based on the Gospel of John that say that John the Baptist did not know Who Jesus was until He baptized Him, and that it was only until the dove landed on his shoulders and when God the Father spoke, that he knew who Jesus was (see v.33). Even though it is true that it is written that John **did not know him**, this could have meant several things. John had never met Jesus because he was living in the desert. However, John knew through the Spirit Who Jesus was even while John was in the womb, and now even more when Jesus was **coming toward** him, indicating that Jesus was at a distance, even *before* the dove had landed. In the other gospels #todo/opzoeken we see that John even told Jesus that he should not baptize Jesus, but that he should be baptized *by* Jesus. 

John also says here that his **purpose** for **baptizing with water** is **that he might be revealed to Israel**. Most likely this is not meant literally, as in John did not baptize so that Jesus had a place to be baptized, merely so that the **Spirit [could] descend from heaven like a dove** and that people could see this. It was not even all of Israel who had seen that happening. Rather, it would be more logical to think of John's baptism as a way for Jesus to be anointed, which would indicate the start of His ministry, in which He revealed Himself to Israel. 
It is like someone in a dry land who wants to find someone in a big crowd of people. If he is the only person selling water, he is bound to meet this person he is looking for (or his servants getting water for him). 

*32 And John bore witness: “I saw the Spirit descend from heaven like a dove, and it remained on him. 33 I myself did not know him, but he who sent me to baptize with water said to me, ‘He on whom you see the Spirit descend and remain, this is he who baptizes with the Holy Spirit.’ 34 And I have seen and have borne witness that this is the Son of God.”*



***Jesus Calls the First Disciples***
*35 The next day again John was standing with two of his disciples, 36 and he looked at Jesus as he walked by and said, “Behold, the Lamb of God!” 37 The two disciples heard him say this, and they followed Jesus. 38 Jesus turned and saw them following and said to them, “What are you seeking?” And they said to him, “Rabbi” (which means Teacher), “where are you staying?” 39 He said to them, “Come and you will see.” So they came and saw where he was staying, and they stayed with him that day, for it was about the tenth hour. 40 One of the two who heard John speak and followed Jesus was Andrew, Simon Peter's brother. 41 He first found his own brother Simon and said to him, “We have found the Messiah” (which means Christ). 42 He brought him to Jesus. Jesus looked at him and said, “You are Simon the son of John. You shall be called Cephas” (which means Peter).*

Andrew is the third disciple, also one who first heard John the Baptist and then followed the real Master, which is Jesus. Little more is said about him than that he called his brother Simon Peter, who is very well known by Bible-readers. 
Probably my own mother did not even know the disciple Andrew, when she named me by this name, for she named me after Britain's royalty, that is Queen Elizabeth II's second son. He too was passed by his older brother Charles. 
The #todo/opzoeken/engels  ironic, niet het juiste woord thing is that I always had this fear as well, to be passed by someone more important. I never wanted to be second best, like giving an assist in basketball and letting another score. I wanted to be Simon Peter himself. God leads the way, however, and humbles those that need to be humbled. Most definitely I am one that needed to be humbled and appreciate not my own talents, but that fact that God has used me. 
How many more people are not even written in the Bible? At least Andrew got two notable mentions, here and at the feeding of the five thousand. #todo/opzoeken Daar ook jongen die brood bij zich had? where again, it was Andrew who found someone who could be of assistance, in this case the little boy who had a small lunch with him. 

> *Lord, please teach me to become like Andrew. You have given me this name for a reason and I need to become more humble. Let me become your servant, even though I am not worthy of it, let alone be worthy of being a Peter. I am glad if I can assist in finding the right people and materials You need for Your works. If I can be of assistance by sacrificing my life and everything in it, I am willing to. Please help me do so, Lord, for my flesh attaches too much to my will.*  
>   
> *In the Name of Your Son, Jesus Christ, I ask You this.*   
>   
> *Amen.*   


***Jesus Calls Philip and Nathanael***
*43 The next day Jesus decided to go to Galilee. He found Philip and said to him, “Follow me.” 44 Now Philip was from Bethsaida, the city of Andrew and Peter. 45 Philip found Nathanael and said to him, “We have found him of whom Moses in the Law and also the prophets wrote, Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph.” 46 Nathanael said to him, “Can anything good come out of Nazareth?” Philip said to him, “Come and see.” 47 Jesus saw Nathanael coming toward him and said of him, “Behold, an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no deceit!” 48 Nathanael said to him, “How do you know me?” Jesus answered him, “Before Philip called you, when you were under the fig tree, I saw you.” 49 Nathanael answered him, “Rabbi, you are the Son of God! You are the King of Israel!” 50 Jesus answered him, “Because I said to you, ‘I saw you under the fig tree,’ do you believe? You will see greater things than these.” 51 And he said to him, “Truly, truly, I say to you, you will see heaven opened, and the angels of God ascending and descending on the Son of Man.”*

John and James were brothers and were connected to Andrew, who had the same teacher, John the Baptist. Andrew and Peter were brothers and were connected to Nathanael through their same city, Bethsaida. Perhaps the other disciples are connected in a way as well. 
Here again, the conversation between Jesus and Nathanael, just like between Jesus and Pontius Pilate, seems a little strange, which could be because of the culture we do not understand, or because of parts of the conversation that have been left out. One question is whether Nathanael understood what Jesus said in v.47. Perhaps there was something like 
> What do you mean?   
after Nathanael said "How do you know me?" Upon which Jesus replied: 
> You said that nothing good can come out of Nazareth. Well, I am from Nazareth.   
In any case, Nathanael's faith was great. Merely because Jesus said that he was under the fig tree, which could have been a wild guess as well. 
The "because" in v.50 could also refer to the second sentence in that verse, meaning that it is **because** he believed the little things, therefore he will see great things. 
This is even more than the standard rewards. Normally, the saying is #todo/opzoeken/reference 
> whoever is faithful in small matters...   
atm  and so if one believes small things, then he will be rewarded with greater faith to believe bigger things. But now Nathanael is promised to be able to **see** great things, such as **heaven being opened**. 
Note, however, that this is not only a good thing, for it could also refer to Stephen who saw heaven being opened #todo/opzoeken/reference (Acts ...) right before he passed away by stoning. 

#todo/opzoeken how are the other disciples connected? 

> Matthew 10:2-4 (ESV) 2 The names of the twelve apostles are these: first, Simon, who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother; James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother; 3 Philip and Bartholomew; Thomas and Matthew the tax collector; James the son of Alphaeus, and Thaddaeus; 4 Simon the Zealot, and Judas Iscariot, who betrayed him.  


#todo/opzoeken how is "truly, truly" in the Greek text? two times?

#biblestudy/devotionals/john 

