# Deuteronomy 5
#biblestudy/devotionals/deuteronomy

*Deuteronomy 5:1-21 (ESV)*
**The Ten Commandments**
*1 And Moses summoned all Israel and said to them, “Hear, O Israel, the statutes and the rules that I speak in your hearing today, and you shall learn them and be careful to do them. 2 The Lord our God made a covenant with us in Horeb. 3 Not with our fathers did the Lord make this covenant, but with us, who are all of us here alive today.*

God did not even make this covenant with the patriarchs.

*4 The Lord spoke with you face to face at the mountain, out of the midst of the fire, 5 while I stood between the Lord and you at that time, to declare to you the word of the Lord. For you were afraid because of the fire, and you did not go up into the mountain. He said:*
*6 “‘I am the Lord your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery.*
*7 “‘You shall have no other gods before me.*
*8 “‘You shall not make for yourself a carved image, or any likeness of anything that is in heaven above, or that is on the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth. 9 You shall not bow down to them or serve them; ~for I the Lord your God am a ::jealous:: God,~*

#todo/opzoeken jealousy in Greek and Hebrew (see also Song of Songs 8?)
The word "jealous" always has a bad connotation in our minds, we immediately think about a jealous husband or a person who is jealous of another person because he has more material possession or talents. But regardless of the translation, we must understand there are two concepts related to this feeling of "jealousy", which are closely related to each other as well. 
The first one is what we (or the Bible) calls "jealousy". The Bible says that God is a jealous God and compares God with a jealous husband whose wife flirts with another man or even cheats her own husband. (Tell me) Do you think this husband have any right to feel jealous? Of course he has, it is *his* wife, just like the wife has the right to be jealous of *her* husband when he is flirting or cheating with someone else. I do not think there is anything wrong with that. 
The ::second word we find in the Bible:: (or concept) for this feeling of "jealousy" is
"envy" (#todo/opzoeken  is the word envy used anywhere in the Bible? 
Now this is a wrong usage of this feeling of jealousy. We can apply this word in situations where someone has a beautiful and fast car and you would like to possess this as well. If it is only *admiration* there is nothing wrong with that. You might admire him or his success, and you want to work hard to get this car. But if your desires get beyond admiration, you want the car so badly that you will do anything to get this car, or even say, *if I cannot have that car, then he will not get it either* and then you cut his tires or scratch his car. That is envy.
Now God has the right to be jealous, we are, after all, His'. The Bible speaks of the people of Israel as His bride, but also as His children. Though a child is not really a "possession", it is still yours. What would a father think if his child suddenly does not feel like his father is his', but another father is? Would he not become jealous then? 
Note that God is not jealous because He is so possessive, but because He loves them. If your child did not want you, would you be jealous because you are so possessive? Can I say to you: "Don't be so possessive. Let the child have his own thoughts." No, of course not. He is your child, you want to take care of it. 
So God does give us freedom, but He still has this feeling of jealousy that the child does not love him and wants another father. ::[nog uit te werken]::

*~visiting the iniquity of the fathers on the children to the third and fourth generation of those who hate me, 10 but showing steadfast love to thousands of those who love me and keep my commandments.~*

What is so great about God is the greatness of His mercy. Whereas the world, the people who do not believe and follow God, say that God is a strict God Who does not love us, we see that God is indeed strict and does punish, but He loves rewarding us so much more and He does not enjoy punishing us at all. 
*Visiting the iniquity* here means that someone will be reminded of his sins, in this case even of his (grand)fathers' sins. It does not mean that the (grand)children will be punished for one's mistakes, but they will be reminded of it and see the natural consequences, which is only logical. 
But to those who love God *and* keep His commandments (for those two things go together), God will show steadfast love to the thousands of people in his family or to the thousands of generations coming after him. 
Now it is hard to imagine how and when God showed thousands of generations His steadfast love. Does God mean this literally? If so, then He would show this for an approximate 30.000 years, because a generation is usually deemed to be approximately 30 years. If God meant thousands of people instead of generations, then we are talking about 200 years for one to have thousands of descendants, which is about seven generations.
In the first case, the 30.000 years since this Mosaic covenant have not passed yet, so that would mean that every Jew (or perhaps every Christian, ::if this covenant applied for us as well:: #todo/opzoeken ) who ever loved God, has descendants who are still steadfastly loved by God. I think we can all attest to that fact. Even though the West is mostly secular, we see how it has been blessed by God with technology and moral values such as freedom of speech and equal rights for all races and for children and women as well. This is not something that is natural all over the world. We see in Malaysia that other ethnicities than the Malay are discriminated against, such as the Chinese and Indians, and that in India women and children do not have the right to an opinion, through arranged marriages, the dowry #todo/opzoeken  and the caste system. Even in China and Japan such things exist, though more subtle sometimes. 
On the other hand, we could say that in the second case, when God is talking about thousands, that this is visibly and factually true in today's world as well. Secularity is clearly rising along with the gradual disappearance of (correct) moral values, and of course rational thinking is replaced with feelings. This would indicate that some of this "blessing" is fading away. Counting back we would then get back to about 1800 when God blessed most of the people who actually loved them and kept His commands, but after that the blessings decreased because less people loved God and kept His commands. Of course there have always been Christians, even after 1800, who love God and keep His commands, and that is why there are still Christians now and why the Left have not taken over the whole world yet. But it is getting harder every month, so to speak. Every month one will see a new thought from the millennials that surprises you again. Just when you think you have seen it all, they can come with something more ridiculous than the previous thing. The last thing I heard was that the song *Hakuna Matata* should be banned because it [appropriates colonialism](https://www.dailywire.com/news/39505/group-wants-disney-drop-hakuna-matata-trademark-emily-zanotti).

*11 “‘You shall not take the name of the Lord your God in vain, for the Lord will not hold him guiltless who takes his name in vain.*

There must be a reason why God writes the second part of the commandment here as an addition to this verse. The other verses until now had a subscript which was the explanation of the reason for the commandment, or the details for practicing this commandment, but this is an explanation of the consequence, not the reason. 
Perhaps, first of all it is clear why this must not be done. Just like it is clear that God does not want any carved image, not even of anything in heaven above, because as soon as you start worshipping this image God will become jealous. 
You might wonder why He will be jealous if you bow down and worship an image of God the Father or Jesus Himself. The fact is that this image is *not* God, it is a mere image. So any time you are bowing down for something "like" God, you are still bowing down for something other than God. Needless to say that God will be even more jealous if you bow down to images of others, such as the disciples, Mary or other "saints".
The reason for this commandment becomes clear when the meaning of the first part of this commandment is clear. Dennis Prager once said in a debate with Ravi Zacharias during the questions and answers that the word "take" is mistranslated as carry, or in other words to *do things in the Name of God*. He also said that this is the only sin in the Ten Commandments that God will not forgive. I do not see this latter statement written here literally, but I do see that God does not hold this person ::guiltless:: #todo/opzoeken . It does not say anything about the duration of this state of being guiltless, though. 
In fact Dennis Prager has already explained why this commandment should be taken more serious than others. It is because doing something, or equivalently *saying* that you are doing something, in the Name of God shows others what God is like. Especially for those who do not know God, they will look at your actions and form their image of God in their minds with these actions of yours. 
Prager named the example of the correlation between the rising of atheism and the rise of Islam where the Name of God is vainly used/carried in their terrorist actions. I would use our present day example of evangelical churches with a focus on grace that are filled with people from Reformed churches. So many wrong things happen in the culture of Reformed churches under the banner of *the Name of the Lord*. These people in the evangelical churches are only a fraction of the those who fled the Reformed church because of the wrong image that was impressed on them. The others have (most likely) become agnostics or atheists, who then in turn "evangelize" their own atheist gospel. That is, in my opinion what (also) causes the rise of atheists.
Note also that the Bible speaks of the Fifth Commandment (below) as the only commandment with a (positive) promise, and though the Bible does not mention this, this Third Commandment is the only commandment with the promise of punishment. 

*12 “‘Observe the Sabbath day, to keep it ~holy~, as the Lord your God commanded you. 13 Six days you shall labor and do all your work, 14 but the seventh day is a Sabbath to the Lord your God. On it you shall not do any work, you or your son or your daughter or your male servant or your female servant, or your ox or your donkey or any of your livestock, or the sojourner who is within your gates, that your male servant and your female servant may rest as well as you. 15 You shall ~remember~ that you were a slave in the land of Egypt, and the Lord your God brought you out from there with a mighty hand and an outstretched arm. Therefore the Lord your God commanded you to keep the Sabbath day.*



*16 “‘Honor your father and your mother, as the Lord your God commanded you, that your days may be long, and that it may go well with you in the land that the Lord your God is giving you.*
*17 “‘You shall not murder.*
*18 “‘And you shall not commit adultery.*
*19 “‘And you shall not steal.*
*20 “‘And you shall not bear false witness against your neighbor.*
*21 “‘And you shall not covet your neighbor's wife. And you shall not desire your neighbor's house, his field, or his male servant, or his female servant, his ox, or his donkey, or anything that is your neighbor's.*