# 1 John 5 (ESV)
***Overcoming the World***
*1 Everyone who believes that Jesus is the Christ has been born of God, and everyone who loves the Father loves whoever has been born of him. 2 By this we know that we love the children of God, when we love God and obey his commandments. 3 For this is the love of God, that we keep his commandments. And his commandments are ::not burdensome::. 4 For everyone who has been born of God ::overcomes:: the world. And this is the victory that has overcome the world—::our faith::. 5 Who is it that overcomes the world except the one who believes that Jesus is the Son of God?*

Here is another piece of reasoning for us to digest. It argues that every Christian should love other Christians (v.1), which is implicit through His commandments (v.2) and that obeying these is not burdensome (v.3). Here is where things become difficult to understand though, because in practice this is *very* burdensome. There are lots of fights and strife between Christians in practice where one cannot stand to see the other, even though they are doctrinally more in line with each other than with any person from any other religion. I could argue that regardless of the tensions between them, there still is love, such as when a child continually has arguments with his parents it does not mean that either party does not love the other (although we should be aware of moralistic or legalistic "Christian" factions who do not express this love but are merely out for their own right, as in proving that they are the ones who are correct and hence causing the many fractured denominations). I cannot argue, however, that these commands are not burdensome, for everyone I know and everyone I have heard of speaking about this topic, and everyone I have read about, says that it is very difficult to love one's neighbor.  
Verse 4 explains this by saying that every Christian has *overcome* the world. The question, however, was not whether a Christian could overcome this problem but whether the process of going through it would be burdensome. Most likely John means something else with the term "burdensome" or he redefines it in the sense of "if you can overcome it, it is not burdensome"—something like "if you can do it, it is not impossible." 
*MacSBNnkjv* explains this Greek Word, βαρεῖαι (from the root βαρύς), which is also translated as *grievous* in the *KJV*, that the commands have a different kind of burden than the legalistic parties put on people, such as the Pharisees did. I find this a good explanation and the fact that we know we *can* overcome it, because Jesus has already overcome it and proved it during His life on Earth, that He could love without strife—and since He has given His power authority to us we can overcome it as well—indicates that the burden is not too high. 
In this sense I would paraphrase this verse as 
> And His commandments are not too burdensome...  
for if they were *too* burdensome, one would not be able to do it. 

***Testimony Concerning the Son of God***
*6 This is he who came by water and blood—Jesus Christ; not by the water only but by the water and the blood. And the Spirit is the one who testifies, because the Spirit is the truth. 7 For there are three that testify: 8 ::the Spirit and the water and the blood; and these three agree.::*

#todo/opzoeken betekenis van water en bloed, zie ook Nicodemus
#todo/nogaftemaken informatie over the Johannine Comma !!

*9 If we receive the testimony of men, the testimony of God is greater, for this is the testimony of God that he has borne concerning his Son. 10 Whoever believes in the Son of God has the testimony in himself. Whoever does not believe God has made him a liar, because he has not believed in the testimony that God has borne concerning his Son. 11 And this is the testimony, that God gave us eternal life, and this life is in his Son. 12 Whoever has the Son has life; whoever does not have the Son of God does not have life.*

This pericope is about proving that Jesus Christ is the One Who came by water and blood which means #todo/nogaftemaken 
The question that John poses himself here is how may know for sure that this is true? We can only know through the testimony of persons. The Spirit first of all testifies Himself, and He is the truth. Except for listening to the Spirit telling us this truth, we can also know because the water and the blood, that is perhaps Jesus's birth and His suffering on the cross and the proofs thereof, will contradict the truth. We, Christians, unlike the Muslims, are not afraid of the truth showing up. If anything is found in the archeological findings that contradicts our Biblical understanding of events concerning Jesus' birth and suffering, or any other doctrine for that matter, we are not afraid and we still believe what is true, for there cannot be any disagreement with the Spirit, which is what is from God, and science or archeology, which are both from God as well. So either what we hear from the Spirit is wrong (and what is written in His Word) or how the science is interpreted is—and then of course we never say the Spirit is wrong. 
There is, however, more testimony, which is us. Because we have eternal life, which is borne in the Son, this means the Spirit is right, for how else did we get eternal life? 
Now, this does not prove anything to unbelievers, for they cannot see the difference between people with or without eternal life. They will see it on the Last Day, but that is no proof for now. But we, who know we have eternal life, live life differently than others because we have a different perspective. We are not afraid of condemnation and we are courageous for the kingdom of God. 

***That You May Know***
*13 I write these things to you who believe in the name of the Son of God, that you may know that you have eternal life. 14 And this is the confidence that we have toward him, that if we ask anything according to his will he hears us. 15 And if we know that he hears us in whatever we ask, we know that we have the requests that we have asked of him.*

This part and the verses above were written to let the readers know that they may have certainty that they have eternal life, even though this life is not visible right now,—although it is visible through the Holy Spirit's work in us, as every Christian knows his own changes in his character—for many Christians doubt their salvation when people tell them that their salvation is not certain.
Now John tells us that even of this invisible eternal life we have confidence, in the fact that God hears us and grants our every request we have asked of Him. Where is the proof of that then? 
This answer is found in the Gospel of John #todo/opzoeken  where Jesus says that everything asked in His Name will be given, so long as it is for the Gospel and thus to glorify the Father. In the next verse John says that this also includes prayer for the forgiveness for the sinner, but he also tells about the exception that will not be granted when asked of God, which is not really an exception because it does not fall under the glorification of the Father. 

*16 If anyone sees his brother committing a sin not leading to death, he shall ask, and God will give him life—to those who commit sins that do not lead to death. There is sin that leads to death; I do not say that one should pray for that. 17 All wrongdoing is sin, but there is sin that does not lead to death.*

The so-called "exception" which one can pray for, but should not, because God will not hear that request, is a prayer for a brother to be saved when he has committed sins that lead to death. Perhaps just like David prayed for his enemies to be defeated and suffer in agony (e.g. Psalms 2,5) or suffer from jealousy (Psalm 23), we should or may (which I am not certain of, but I think it is allowed) pray for their demise. In my opinion that would glorify God for He is a righteous God and His righteousness puts the punishment of the wicked into effect and also shows His patience and mercy. 
To explain this a bit more, understand that *MacSBNnkjv* defines this sin that leads to death not as a specific mentionable sin, but as the last sin that goes too far according to God. He does not accept this sin and it is a sin that is deliberately done by the person who has no repentance of it. The limit of God's mercy has been reached. 
Now God's mercy and grace are boundless, one may say, but one needs to understand this behavior of God in the right context. If God allows every sin to happen, unlimited times—without the sinner repenting—would God not contradict His own righteousness? Would it not show His weakness in taking action against the wicked and those He hates? No, God shows His strength in limiting this mercy and not only punishes the sinner, but excludes the *possibility* to ever be saved and enter heaven. If a human person would allow everything to happen to him and his family by his enemy, a bystander would nearly always come to the conclusion that the person is weak. Mercy would not come up in the bystander's mind, because it would require love and strength and patience. But when this person takes action at some point then it is clear that all this time he had been patient and had hidden his strength, or better yet shown his strength of character through his patience, and now his mental or physical strength through his actions. 
A good example of this is seen in the movie #tags/movies *The Do-Over* where the protagonist is mistreated at work by his colleagues, at home by his wife and her children that he takes care of. It is not nonchalance perse, but rather weakness, as is unfolded in the movie, until he meets Adam Sandler #tags/famouspeople/actors who teaches him how to enjoy life.
So God's mercy is most clearly seen at the moment He stops giving mercy by showing that all this time He was being patient and could have wiped out His enemies in a fraction of second with the slightest gesture. 
What do we say then of Psalm 103:12 where *all* of our transgressions have been removed, no matter how big they are? Indeed, in this sense God's mercy is unlimited. It does not matter how big one's transgression is, as long as he repents. And it does not matter how often he does it, as long as he does his best not to sin anymore. But for those who deliberately sin, this mercy, no matter how small the sin, is not endless. 

*18 We know that everyone who has been born of God does not keep on sinning, but he who was born of God protects him, and the evil one does not touch him.*

In the *NKJV* the former *him* is translated as *himself* which makes it easier to understand what this verse means. One should protect himself. But even if this pronoun was referring to this brother in v.16, this verse would probably also be correct, for the one of God, that is us, should pray for this brother who sins and God will protect this person then. 

*19 We know that we are from God, and the whole world lies in the power of the evil one.*

This is a clear statement that everyone who does not believe in the Lord Yahweh lies in the power of the devil. In other words, every other religion than Christianity is afalse religion and another mask of devil worship, even if the believer (of that religion) is unbeknownst of this. 
This is not an arrogant statement because there is no implication that we are better or smarter for having chosen the better side. Also this is not arrogance because we do not treat others differently because of this. These are at least two of the characteristics of arrogance, thinking and treating others like one is better than the other. As Christians we believe that are just as bad (Romans 3:23, 5:12) but we have been given grace and have been elected. So we did not make the choice to go to God, and we could not have made the right choice with our wicked hearts, but when God changed our hearts, we merely accepted it. We also do not treat others in a bad way for we are commanded to love our neighbors as ourselves (Mark 12:30-31).

Of course, one might think, every religion says this about all the other religions and everyone thinks they are right themselves. However, that is not the case at all. 
Hindus #tags/religion/hinduism think that all religions are the same and that our Jesus was a reincarnation of one of their gods and that the founder of Buddhism was another one. 
Buddhism #tags/religion/buddhism does not make any mention of other religions and in practice they claim that every religion is right, but merely has a different perspective on the truth. 
Even Islam #tags/religion/islam claims that the Gospels (that is the New Testament) and the Prophets (that is the Old Testament) are the books to refer to when there is a dispute between the Qur'an and our books. 
We know that no more than one religion can be true at the same time. Even the view of Buddhists that these religions are merely perspectives are not reconcilable. All religions are ultimately mutually exclusive and to quote from Ravi Zacharias #church/sermons/@ravizacharias 
> All religions are completely different in the core, and at best they are superficially equal.   

*20 And we know that the Son of God has come and has given us understanding, so that we may know him who is true; and we are in him who is true, in his Son Jesus Christ. He is the true God and eternal life. 21 Little children, keep yourselves from idols.*

John is affirming here by writing verse 21 right after verse 20 that everything that is not true is an idol. God is the only one Who is true and those in Him are true and Jesus Christ is the only truth. 
What if someone speaks of, say, maths and says that that is true as well? What is meant here, is that everything that flows out from Jesus is true, which is also maths, because He created that and all science—thus all science that points towards another creator such as aliens #tags/conspiracy/aliens and evolution is idolatry. 
In fact, even if aliens and evolution really existed they should be merely that and not idolized, for why should one have pictures of aliens everywhere and proposing evolution in all kinds of ways through the man-to-fish or ape-to-man evolutionary pictures? This is only done to confirm oneself. For example when football fans fight each other over which club is better, they do not do so on the basis of statistics and reasoning, because they are not actually out for the truth. Rather yet, they are only out for being in the right, and because or when it is not possible to convince the other party they use violence. But why would they want to be in the right? It is not as if they are standing up for their idol or as if the football club actually cares about what the audience thinks in this particular case. No, it is only for themselves so that they themselves may be affirmed. No one wants to be wrong or be proven wrong and to be shown that what he stood for is false. This is part, or perhaps the basis, of cognitive dissonance. Ultimately, it is driven by pride which in itself is driven by a lack of confirmation of who they are. 
Bart Ehrman who firmly believed in Jesus Christ and called himself a newborn Christian, as well as Michael Shermer #tags/famouspeople/critics, were both not only believers but proponents of their faith as well. Now that their faith is gone and that they have gone to atheism #tags/religion/atheism in the latter's case and perhaps agnosticism in the former's case (this is not clear #todo/opzoeken ) they have become proponents of new theories themselves. Michael Shermer has founded *Skeptic Magazine* ( #todo/opzoeken  or *Reason* Magazine?), a magazine that is skeptic of all things, especially on religion and creation, while Bart Ehrman has become a historian and critic of religious theories on the veracity and historicity of Jesus and the claims the Bible and Christianity make concerning the divinity of Jesus. It is not like both of them left Christianity for what it is and continued their life. No, they had to find a new *faith*, so to speak, and defend or prove that their new faith is the right one, both basing this on "science": Shermer placing his faith on evolutionary biology (although according to James Tour #tags/famouspeople/christian#—a professor in nanotechnology and biochemistry and one of a handful of people who actually understand what happens on a molecular level in cells—the theory of evolution is far from formalized and needs a lot more research, to put it mildly)(Footnote: See the *Ben Shapiro Sunday Special*-interview with Michael Shermer #tags/famouspeople/critics for more on his standpoints.) and Ehrman creating his own theories on myths surrounding the Resurrection, such as the growth of Christianity (that this was done through violent suppression of the people through the government), martyrdom (that this was highly overstated and should be relativized), among others. #todo/opzoeken Welke theorieën nog meer? 
#todo/opzoeken  Does Bart Ehrman believe in evolution?
In short, those who need the affirmation try to prove themselves. This is wrong both within Christianity as outside of it, for when one does this within Christianity, he makes himself an idol, because he wants himself to be proven right and he is putting himself higher than God. In fact, he would be using God as a stepping stone in order to make himself feel better. 

#biblestudy/devotionals/1john
