# 1 John 1 (ESV) 
#biblestudy/devotionals/1john

***The Word of Life***
*1 That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we looked upon and have touched with our hands, concerning the word of life— 2 the life was made manifest, and we have seen it, and testify to it and proclaim to you the eternal life, which was with the Father and was made manifest to us— 3 that which we have seen and heard we proclaim also to you, so that you too may have fellowship with us; and indeed our fellowship is with the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ. 4 And we are writing these things so that our joy may be complete.*

What John and the disciples—if he wrote this together with a few of them, although they would probably have all died by the time of writing (Footnote: It is not certain, but (early) Church tradition identifies John in his advanced age and John was the last and only disciple to survive martyrdom.). Still, John uses the plural first person form because he knows and wants to indicate here that he was not alone and that there was a testimony of *multiple* people, which renders it valid in the Jewish context. 
John continues to explain why he proclaims this message of truth, which is because he wants to have fellowship with them. The keyword here is *fellowship*. John is aiming for two things at the same time, namely that they have fellowship with them *and* with the Father and the Son, because that—and only that—will make one's joy *complete*. 
Of course there are other things that can make the Christian joyful and Christ's sacrifice for us and His grace of life already gives us sufficient joy. But one still feels sadness for those who strayed from the path (not that they were ever believers) and those who have never known Christ. The joy is made complete if not only Christians, but the rest of the world can joy in fellowship together as well. 
Some nominal Christians will say that it is possible and they allow all kinds of believers within their congregation and fellowship with them *as if* they were Christian. The next verses will explain why it is impossible and not allowed to have fellowship with such people, even though we want to. 

***Walking in the Light***
*5 This is the message we have heard from him and proclaim to you, that God is light, and in him is no darkness at all. 6 If we say we have fellowship with him while we walk in darkness, we lie and do not practice the truth. 7 But if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship with one another, and the blood of Jesus his Son cleanses us from all sin.*

Actually this verse is really clear about walking with God. One either walks with God or he does not. This already was clear to everyone, but some thought they could walk with those walking in the darkness, which are those referred to in verse 3, because they do not have fellowship with John yet. Now suppose we fellowship with those who walk in darkness, how can we do that while walking in the light? One cannot set one foot in the darkness and say he is walking in the light, for then he would be in fact partially walking in darkness. If he were to hold out his hand to hold another person's hand who walks in darkness, then at least his hand is in darkness and still he would not be completely walking in the light (cf. #todo/opzoeken  the verse telling us to chop off our hand when it sins). 
There is simply now way for a person to walk in the light while simultaneously walking with someone who is *not* in the light. And when one is not walking in the light, we cannot fellowship with God. 

*8 If we say we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us. 9 If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.* #biblestudy/memorization *10 If we say we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us.*

Who would ever dare to say he does not sin? For a Christian this is unthinkable, but in practice there are so many who claim not to be sinners. Ray Comfort #tags/famouspeople/christian often encounters people who claim they are not sinners. They have committed sins, when they spend some time thinking about it, but they do not think of themselves as sinners, just as when someone has lied he does not claim he is a liar, while that is actually the definition of being a liar. 
Muslims #tags/religion/islam also do not think of themselves as sinners, although they do admit they do sin. Their logic is different. They know that Allah cannot unite Himself with sinners and so if they were sinners Allah could not unite Himself with them. So far this is true, but then comes the wrong assumption. They assume that Muslims are united with Allah and hence Muslims are not sinners, but on which verse of the Quran do they base this claim? #todo/opzoeken 
The Bible is really clear and simple on this matter. Verse 8 says we have sinned, verse 9 says that God is able to forgive us our sins through Jesus Christ's blood and then we will have fellowship with God the Father and Son *if* we walk in the light (vv.3,7). 
1 John 2:1-6 gives us more instructions and encouragement on this. 
#biblestudy/devotionals/1john