# 1 John 4 (ESV)
***Test the Spirits***
*1 Beloved, do not believe every spirit, but test the spirits to see whether they are from God, for many false prophets have gone out into the world. 2 By this you know the Spirit of God: every spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ has come in the flesh is from God, 3 ::and every spirit that does not confess Jesus is not from God. This is the spirit of the antichrist, which you heard was coming and now is in the world already.::*

The antichrist can be recognized by this: that he does not confess that Jesus is from God. One would expect the antichrist to be an atheist like Kim Jong-Un or Hitler, or someone like Obama who is a proponent of abortions and lets countries and economies fall to their demise. But none of them have spoken of the incarnation of Jesus Christ and that He is truly the Son of God. Atheists and Leftists usually do not even believe in the existence of God, they do not care about it, let alone about "additional" doctrines about His Son. 
This could mean that the real antichrists will be religious, like Chinese and Korean cult leaders #todo/opzoeken claiming that they are Jesus or #todo/opzoeken/engels misvormen the doctrine of Trinity in some other way. On the other hand, Kim Jong-Un also implies that Jesus is not of God, because he implied (or can I say claims) to be God himself. 

*4 Little children, you are from God and have overcome them, for he who is in you is greater than he who is in the world. 5 They are from the world; therefore they speak from the world, and the world listens to them.*

The reason why people listen to the unreasonable arguments from governments all over the world to obey rules concerning COVID-19 is because these people are from the world. COVID-19 is supposed to be a deadly and highly-contagious disease and all kinds of "facts" have been presented through media. Every well-thinking human being would know (or at least feel) that these facts are made up, the argumentation is wrong and even if all of that were true—which can be seen by reality that it is not, because people are still healthy and most if not all of those people whom we know were infected or at least tested positively have recovered—the restrictions are not on par with the impact. #tags/historic events/corona#
For when in history have restaurants and other events ever been closed, not only on a state, but on a world-wide level? When has a total lockdown ever occurred and quarantine for both the sick and the healthy? When have schools ever closed for longer periods? Nothing as serious as this has ever happened. 
On top of that, at the same time policy makers such as governer #todo/opzoeken from California #todo/opzoeken/engels huurt af a restaurant while telling everyone to skip celebrating Thanksgiving this year and minister Grapperhaus joyfully goes to a wedding, shake hands and hug and resides with a big group of people. These people are not afraid of COVID-19 but they are inciting fear in everyone. 

*6 We are from God. Whoever knows God listens to us; whoever is not from God does not listen to us. By this we know the Spirit of truth and the spirit of error.*

Can this line by misused by cult-leaders? It is John who had the apostolic authority to say such a thing, but how are we ever in a position to cite this? How are we able to distinguish between the people who have the Spirit of truth and the spirit of error without anyone with this authority?
Those who are from God already have this authority, they do not need to be the apostle of Christ like the Twelve c.q. Eleven were, plus Paul. Those who are not from God, however, are not allowed to say this. They do say it and they might think they do have the authority given them in Matthew 28:18 and that v.4 applies to them. However, v.3 clearly indicates that those who do not confess Jesus are not from God and neither are those who do not keep God's commandments.
How can we distinguish subtle false teachers then as mentioned before in this book #todo wordt het een book, commentary, Study Bible notes of Devotional? such as Joseph Prince, Joel Osteen, Joyce Meyer, Steven Furtick, Todd White and Bill Johnson #tags/famouspeople, all of whom preach something like the Gospel, but sometimes in a very subtle way deviating from the real Gospel, but who are also philanthropic and not unloving and abusive such as cult-leaders are? #biblestudy/questions One way is to look inside their hearts and to see whether the love they show is genuine. Unfortunately that is not possible, but we can look at their lifestyle and their wealth. Quite often this shows their love for money and worldly comfort, and this goes at the cost of love for their fellowmen who are in need of this money. Even (former) millionaires such as Rick Warren and Francis Chan (I do not know about the wealth of other pastors) but also Christians such as Mike Lindell #tags/famouspeople/christian have given most of their wealth to God, which is—in my view—the right thing to do. #tags/money The only reason to keep large amounts money is because one has a better way of using it in God's Kingdom, for example through investments.

***God Is Love***
*7 Beloved, let us love one another, for love is from God, and whoever loves has been born of God and knows God. 8 Anyone who does not love does not know God, because God is love. 9 In this the love of God was made manifest among us, that God sent his only Son into the world, so that we might live through him. 10 In this is love, not that we have loved God but that he loved us and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins.*

Verse 10 is clearly speaking of a specific and important chronological order. He loved us first—even though John does not use the word "first", this is clear from the context. 
The love that someone has, must have a source, just like money and energy have their own sources before they can be used. Our love comes from the Father. Even if part of it was given to us by our parents, then still that love would ultimately have come from the Father. 
So if anyone does not love, he has never received any love from the Father. Either that, or see the notes on the next two verses. 

*11 Beloved, if God so loved us, we also ought to love one another. 12 No one has ever seen God; if we love one another, God abides in us and his love is perfected in us.*

Verse 12 says that we love one another then God abides in us. This would not be possible if God loved us first. So reading this verse in its full context would mean that if God loves us (at the time that we do not love others, because before He loved us we could not do otherwise) and we love others after that, then God will abide in us. 
**Example.** Take for example a water hose and suppose that we are at the end of this hose. Suppose also that water is love. The water that is inserted in this hose can run through it given the right pressure or gravity in the direction from the source to the receiver, which is you. This source of water is unlimited, but only a limited amount of is used. For how much water can one drink per day, 2-3 liters? And how much love does one need to stay alive? But if this water is passed on to others, the water will flow freely and continually. It will be sufficient for everyone. Also, the longer the hose gets, the higher the pressure will be on the hose and the faster the water will flow through each of us. 
It does not even matter whether some places are very difficult to reach and require a lot of pressure, even if the water is as high as Mount Rushmore, for the source is located in heaven and is higher than everyone on Earth. 

#todo plaatje toevoegen #personal/family/familytime/done

*13 By this we know that we abide in him and he in us, because he has given us of his Spirit.*

This is another requirement and proof that God is in us—when we have the Spirit. This means by definition that those who do not claim there to be any spirit, such as the Jehova's Witnesses who claim that the spirit is merely the power of God, cannot know that they abide in God and God in them, for how can a power make this known to one? 

#todo/opzoeken do Jehova's Witnesses speak in tongues and perform miracles? 

A few of the requirements and proofs for knowing God and being from Him are attested by the following. 
* They confess that Jesus is the Son of God (v.1.)
* They listen to the the disciples (v.6)
* They love others (v.8)
* God's love abides in you and is perfected (v.12)
	* It is perfected by fearless love (v.18)
Not coincidentally John seems to summarize these in v.14ff. 

*14 And we have seen and testify that the Father has sent his Son to be the Savior of the world. 15 Whoever confesses that Jesus is the Son of God, God abides in him, and he in God. 16 So we have come to know and to believe the love that God has for us. God is love, and whoever abides in love abides in God, and God abides in him. 17 By this is love perfected with us, so that we may have confidence for the day of judgment, because as he is so also are we in this world. 18 ::There is no fear in love, but perfect love casts out fear. For fear has to do with punishment, and whoever fears has not been perfected in love::.*

#biblestudy/memorization/nathan
The love that we have may not be perfect yet, but it is *being* perfected. Therefore one can recognize true Christians by the lack of fear they have concerning punishment. Surely, they can be afraid of worldly punishment, for they know they will receive this for believing in the One true God, although real Christians will courageously suffer the consequences nonetheless, but they will not be afraid of godly punishment, because they know God has forgiven them and even if there is a (divine) punishment of some sort, it will be good, for God is sovereign. 
This is like David who knew he would be punished by God for his sin against God, Uriah and Bathsheba. Still, however, he knew that God's punishment would be righteous and his love and obedience for God were not based on fear. 

*19 We love because he first loved us. 20 If anyone says, “I love God,” and hates his brother, he is a liar; for he who does not love his brother whom he has seen cannot love God whom he has not seen. 21 And this commandment we have from him: whoever loves God must also love his brother.*

The term for brotherly love, ἀδελφοὶ (*adelphoi*), is repeated more than once. In 1 John 3:10,14, here and also in 1 John 5:16 this is emphasized. It is also emphasized that one cannot love God but not his brother. In the previous chapter *adelphos* was translated as "the brothers", however, which could mean brothers and sisters (in the case of general love) or our Christian brothers and sisters, meaning that we should love everyone of course, but especially our fellow Christians. For how can one love others but not their own family? 
In practice this happens more often than not. Why would one have more serious arguments and discussions with one's own family members than with their neighbors for example? It is because with one's own family members one is not afraid to speak out and to behave in his natural sinful way, while in front of neighbors and guests one will do his best to show his best and most hospitable side. 
So the first reason why this happens in practice while in theory this should not happen and according to this law of God *may* not happen, is because people do their best more for strangers than for family members due to shame. 
The second reason is because people do not interact with guests and neighbors very often, for if they did, they would not be guests anymore, but friends and then the shame would slightly disappear and the less shame their is, the more natural our behavior becomes and we would revert to the situation in the previous paragraph. 
The third reason is because we know we need to live with our neighbors for many years. The same goes for one's situation at work. When one knows it it his last few days at work, why would he bother being friendly or doing his best, except for moral grounds? Family can be escaped, by not having contact anymore, and one can even find new friends. 
Setting all things aside, however, *ceteris paribus* one should and would love his own family member more than a guest or neighbor. If it were not for everything that happened in the past between you and a family member, a family member would always have higher priority than any other person.  
John knows that real life is not *ceteris paribus* and that the past is not easily forgotten. But he is giving us the command here to do so anyway, because it is a *fact* that one cannot abide in God or love Him when he does not love his brother. 
Secondly, he is telling us to look forward, because we *will* be living forever in an inescapable situation with our fellow Christian. Also, we will not have any of our past, because these will be forgotten. There will be no more shame but there will be plenty of forgiveness. If we can look forward to that situation, we can virtually, or better said, spiritually live in that world and treat our relationships in this world as such already. #church/material/sermon

Within churches we see the same type of behavior, although the premise is different as we shall see. Members of a specific church perhaps would treat unbelievers better than they would treat Christians of a church or denomination that is not their own. I would contend, however, that this is due to two things. First, these members do not see other Christians as family to begin with. They do not even see other Christians as being on the same as they are against the world who is against Christians. Perhaps this is because they have always lived with the view that the whole world is Christian, just like "everyone" believed in God in the Middle Ages and the only difference was whether one was Catholic or or Protestant. Then in a different situation where everyone was Protestant, the Reformed saw those who were Baptists, for example, as the "other side" and so on. But this granularity went so deep that eventually in practice the only "family members in Christ" one *felt* he had were those of his own congregation. Such animosity had risen in the Dutch (Footnote: Perhaps this was also the case in other countries, but not divided into such specific granularities, for which countries has a many denominations as The Netherlands?) Christian church culture and this would continue to even deeper levels of family and parties within one's congregation, which is the cause of the many factions we have within denominations thereof. 
All of this is lack of cohesiveness which is a symptom of lack of love. If love had been taught, then forbearance would be the main topic instead of doctrine. 

#todo/nogaftemaken  Toon voorbeelden van kerkelijke situaties??

But one of the reason for the many arguments and fights in churches or between Christians is because people work closely together and then learn about each others irritable traits. Many other Christians have not worked with other Christians but they been taught by their elders and church culture that the other church is not pure in its teaching. 

#biblestudy/devotionals/1john
