# 2 Thessalonians 1 (ESV)
 ***Greeting***
*1 Paul, Silvanus, and Timothy,*
*To the church of the Thessalonians in God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ:*
*2 Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.*

***Thanksgiving***
*3 We ought always to give thanks to God for you, brothers, as is right, because your faith is growing abundantly, and the love of every one of you for one another is ::increasing::. 4 Therefore we ourselves boast about you in the churches of God for your steadfastness and faith in all your persecutions and in the afflictions that you are enduring.*

Often we forget to **give thanks** to God when our brothers and sisters have grown in their faith. We might give thanks when we have asked for something specific and usually when that specific thing comes soon after we have asked it, but when God gives us something good that we have not asked for, or He gives us something that we did ask for, but it was a long time ago and we had even forgotten we had asked it, we forget to thank God for this. Paul, however, remembers clearly that he asked God for the spiritual growth and maturity of the Thessalonians and the **increasing** of their **love for one another** (see also notes on 1 Thessalonians 4:9-12). He does not forget to thank God either, because he has prayed God so many times for the Thessalonians and all the other churches (every day, see #todo/opzoeken/reference) and he thanked God every time he thought of each of these churches (by implication of Philippians 1:3f). 
In fact, Paul prayed so often often for spiritual maturity that he *could not* forget this. This is what we need to do. Spurgeon once mentione (in the sermon *True Prayer, True Power!*) another preacher, who mentioned how he prayed, which was to pray for one thing first, before asking for the next thing. Perhaps he was speaking of praying out one thing fully, in the sense of not mentioning it with two lines and then going on to the next point, but rather praying it over until nothing could be said anymore; or perhaps he meant that he would not pray for anything else until God had fulfilled his prayer. Either way, a person who prays as such is not quick to forget what he prayed for, and when his prayer is fulfilled by God, it is not so much a surprise to him that he forgets to thank God for this. #church/material/sermon

***The Judgment at Christ's Coming***
*5 This is evidence of the righteous judgment of God, that you may be considered worthy of the kingdom of God, for which you are also suffering— 6 since indeed God considers it just to repay with affliction those who afflict you, 7 and to grant relief to you who are afflicted as well as to us, when the Lord Jesus is revealed from heaven with his mighty angels 8 in flaming fire, inflicting vengeance on those who do not know God and on those who do not obey the gospel of our Lord Jesus. 9 They will suffer the punishment of eternal destruction, away from the presence of the Lord and from the glory of his might, 10 when he comes on that day to be glorified in his saints, and to be marveled at among all who have believed, because our testimony to you was believed.*

In v.5, it says that despite all persecutions Christians in Thessalonica, God is **just**, for God is **righteous** in His **judgment**. Perhaps depending on the translation—I read from the NIV here, read by David Suchet #tags/famouspeople/actors although the ESV translation is better—it might seem strange that it implicates that *in spite of* all this **affliction** and **vengeance**, **God considers it just**.
There are several reasons why we can say He is righteous, but the first thing we need to know, is that God is righteous because even those Christians who live good lives—and who have been persecuted—still deserve this persecution because God is righteous, even when Christians have given up their former pagan and idolatrous lives, for these Christian martyrs are still sinners as we all are, and God is righteous in punishing them. If that were the case that would be true and God would still be good.
But that is not what it is about, because the next verse shows how God punished the world. If people ever say God is not righteous because there are so many wraths of God—or *acts* of God—through nature, through suffering, through death, and all kinds of illnesses—we can show here that the world is not good at all. The world has persecuted Christians and it deserves to perish, it deserves to be punished by God. God is righteous and what He does, is good.
God is also righteous in letting the pagan Thessalonians sin a little more, or perhaps more than just a little—so that He can punish them even more. Remember, God is not One Who *likes* to punish but He needs to do so. God will use a cup and measure it (#todo/opzoeken/reference Isaiah ?). When the measure is full, He will punish. But remember that His cup is big because His patience is great. That is the reason why the Thessalonians could continue in their sin—so that He could show His patience. 
Yet even after this patience people have not changed their hearts and their ways. #quotes/church (from Andrew)
> But with greater patience also comes a greater punishment.  
Know that this is a principle in life. The first principle is
> With great power comes great responsibility.  
We all know this perhaps from formal literature or from the second Spider-Man movie starring Toby Maguire. The second principle, or actually the *only* principle in this book, is the principle that with greater patience comes more consequence.
We see this in a lot of situations in our own life, that one either gets a chance to do something right now or he gets a chance to do it later, but in the latter case he is expected to do more then. Think for example of buying a house. One can buy it right now for a certain amount or buy it later with interest. Or one could graduate at age 16 and acquire a general or vocational certificate. But when one wants to graduate a few years later for an intermediate or academic certificate (say the O- or A-levels in the British education system) then it is required to get higher grades or more education in more courses. One gets more time, but one is expected to do more in this time.
Or take a look at the Ninevites in the Book of Jonah. They were given only forty days to repent or God would turn the city upside down. In those forty days, they turned their ways. They did not change their ways to live completely according to Jewish customs and laws, as they were not familiar with those and God was not expecting that of them, but they turned their ways sufficiently to prevent God from turning the city upside down.
In the same way when one is given not 40, but 400 days or even 4,000 days—which would be approximately 10 years—one is expected to have changed much more than the Ninevites have. But when we see in the local church people who have been sitting in the pews for ten or even more years but still have the same behavior, we can wonder about how great God's patience is but also how great His vengeance will be when these have not repented. #church/material/sermon

What can we say then of God's righteousness? Is God righteous in punishing these people? Of course He is. We can never adhere to God's standards, but in this case we do not even suffice to His *adapted* standards, which are merciful standards that the offers to pagans.
Also take note of the fact that in the case that one who has sinned two years more than another person, God has been patient with this person for an extra two years compared to this other person. When this person repents and acknowledges his sin, he must also acknowledge that he has sinned two years more than this other person has. So, his repentance should and must be greater than that of this other person for he has had not only committed more sins, but also had more time to think about it and to repent.

What should we do then as Christians? We should realize how much we have sinned. In the first place, write down our sins. Repent, forgive others who have hurt us and ask forgiveness to those whom we need to ask forgiveness. Then realize that God has forgiven us and burn this piece of paper on which we have written our sins. Secondly, even more important, we must realize God's forgiveness and His patience with us over all these years, until the day of today #todo/opzoeken/engels .
We will realize how patient God has been when we realize that thankfulness is proportional to this realization of God's patience. This thankfulness will render us capable of changing our ways.
We need thankfulness and gratitude in order to change our thoughts, which influence our ways. For it is our thoughts that control our behaviour, and it is behavior that controls our acts, and it is our acts that let us sin or do the right thing.

*11 To this end we always pray for you, that our God may make you worthy of his calling and may fulfill every resolve for good and every work of faith by his power, 12 so that the name of our Lord Jesus may be glorified in you, and you in him, according to the grace of our God and the Lord Jesus Christ.*

God is righteous in considering us worthy (v.5), even though we are not worthy at all (even if we have suffered for the kingdom), but God can *make* us worthy. In the same we are not holy nor righteous, but God will make us just that. We need to keep this prayer in our hearts and pray for our brothers and sisters and ourselves that God will make us worthy of His calling. We need to know that God's calling is a high one. In the times when many missionaries were sent these missionaries often lacked money, help and sometimes the language as well. In the Torchlighters® series we see these missionaries speaking the local language, but what we do not see (except in the story of Robert Jermain Thomas #tags/famouspeople/christian/missionaries who studied hard to learn Korean) is how they studied the language for years in order to master it, some even up to the point where they could translate it, such as Hudson Taylor who translated the Bible into many Chinese dialects, for which there was not even a script #todo/opzoeken bestond er al een handschrift daarvoor? 
Most of us are not ready for missions like that, even with all the technology available to us. We are not ready to be circumcised, like Timothy was, or to be thrown rotten tomatoes at, like John Wesley #tags/famouspeople/christian/missionaries, let alone to be murdered as a martyr.


#biblestudy/devotionals/2thessalonians