# 20220807 Het te zachte hart en de geboden van God — 2 Thessalonicenzen 3. Andrew Yong
Engels: Softheartedness and the commands of God
#church/sermons/@andrewyong/concept

***Pray for Us***
*1 Finally, brothers, pray for ::us::, that the word of the Lord may speed ahead and be honored, as happened among you,*

Paul and his team need prayers as well, just like any other person, but rather than asking prayer for specific personal items he asks that the **word of the Lord** is spread *quickly* and is **honored**. 
He also has a second prayer request for him and his team, which is to **be delivered from wicked and evil men**. This is referring to those people persecuting him for spreading Christianity, not so much because they claim Jesus is God, but more because Christianity was gaining a lot of traction and followers. Then men did not *honor the Word* as Paul just mentioned. They misinterpreted the Word in such a way that the prophecies did not refer to Jesus. 
When Stephen gave his #todo/opzoeken/engels betoog on the prophets of Israel, for example, the Scribes #todo/opzoeken of ook Farizeeën could find no wrongs, but were agitated because of his accusation that they had now murdered the next prophet, Jesus Christ, God's own Son, as well. These men, by murdering God's children who spread the Word, are not honoring the Word of the Lord. 

*2 and that we may be delivered from wicked and evil men. For ::not all:: have faith.*

For what reason does Paul ask **be delivered from wicked and evil men**? In the next sentence we see that this is because **not all have faith**. He could be referring to his teammates and that not all have enough faith and that that is the reason why they need prayer. For if all had enough faith then they would know that God placed the wicked there for a reason and would also remove them when the time is there. 
It could also refer to the wicked as in: some do not have this faith like ours and are wicked. Either way, v.3. concludes that **the Lord is faithful**, even when we are unfaithful ( Just like at the end of Romans 5 #todo/opzoeken ). 
Note that Paul puts these two adverbs together: "not ... have faith, but ... faithful". In Dutch and Chinese the words *faith* (geloof, 信任 #todo/opzoeken as in *belief*) and *faithful* (betrouwbaar, 可靠 as in *reliable*) are completely different and not related to each other. In the core #todo/opzoeken/engels these words mean the same of course, despite the fact that the Dutch and Chinese translate it differently. For one is not faithful—or reliable or trustworthy—if he cannot be believed. Or in other words, because someone is faithful I put my faith in him. 

*3 But the Lord is faithful. He will establish you and guard you against the evil one. 4 And we have confidence in the Lord about you, that you are doing and will do the things that we command. 5 May the Lord direct your hearts to the love of God and to the steadfastness of Christ.*

Regardless of whom the ones without faith in v.2 refer to, **the Lord is faithful**. He is the One Who will **establish you and guard you against the evil one**. In Him only do we need to put our trust. He only will guide us through this life where, except for a few, we can rely on no one. Note that I did not say that we could not *trust* anyone. If anyone makes us a promise, how can we be sure that he keeps it? It is the same thing with marriage, which is a promise or a vow from one spouse to the other, to be faithful until death. There is no guarantee that a person will be faithful to the other. If we *rely* on the promise of another, we will be #todo/opzoeken/engels bedrogen uitkomen. But if we rely on God's promise that **He guards us against the evil one** as long as we follow Him and keep His commands, we can be *certain* that God will keep His promise. 
Paul mentions in v.4 that he has **confidence in the Lord** about the Thessalonians' behavior, which is a kind of trust. Paul does not say that he trusts the Thessalonians. He may have seen or heard of their good behavior, but nothing tells him they will continue to do so. The only certainty he can have is *in the Lord*, for He knows that God will work in them until the day Jesus returns (cf. Philippians 1:6). 
So in this world we can never have perfect trust, reliance or confidence in *people*, but when we have this **in the Lord** then we know for *certain* that God will do His *in* these people. Yet, this only applies to Christians. We may know, for example, that one's believing spouse is not perfect, but will be made perfect, sanctified and washed, if you will, over the course of life, as will he. But if the spouse is an unbeliever there is no certainty as to whether he will ever come to Christ (cf. 1 Corinthians 7:17).

> ::*1 Korinthe 7:15-16. Maar als de ongelovige scheiden wil, laat hij scheiden. De broeder of de zuster is in zulke gevallen niet gebonden. God heeft ons echter tot vrede geroepen.*::  
> ::*Want hoe weet u, vrouw, of u uw man zult behouden? Of hoe weet u, man, of u uw vrouw zult behouden?*::  

***Warning Against Idleness***
*6 Now we command you, brothers, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you keep away from any brother who is walking in ::idleness:: and not in accord with the tradition that you received from us. 7 For you yourselves know how you ought to imitate us, because we were not idle when we were with you, 8 nor did we eat anyone's bread without paying for it, but with toil and labor we worked night and day, that we might not be a burden to any of you. 9 It was not because we do not have that right, but to give you in ourselves an ::example:: to imitate. 10 For even when we were with you, we would give you this command: If anyone is not willing to work, let him not eat.*

Paul shows that this command is for everyone, **even** for *themselves*. They do not differentiate themselves from the other Christians in their work, bur rather differentiate themselves from other leaders in their privileges. Every Christian needs to be like Paul, who did not fear intensive labor either for survival (to pay for one's own food and lodging), to further the Gospel or to merely be an example to other Christians. 
The best commanders and instructors of the army will join their students and lead them into battle, unlike some scenes in action movies where a commander tells his students to attack an enemy while staying behind himself because the enemy appears to be too strong. 

**Voorbeeld.** #tags/movies Bruce Lee, leerling van Huo Yuan Jia.

Wat bedoel ik nu met het woord "zelfs" wat als "ook toen" wordt vertaald in de HSV? 
This strict command to deny one food if he **is not willing to work** is harsher than it appears. In the Netherlands it merely seems like this is used as an old saying, like "if you gotta eat, you gotta work" 

> Wie wil eten, moet werken.   

but it is much more than that. Yes, of course there is a responsibility for every Christian (and every person actually) to work. 

**Voorbeeld.** Fidel Castro, leader of the communist state of Cuba, even commanded the people when he came to power that people should either work or study, and that they had one year to think about this, or otherwise end up in jail. Except for the latter this is a Biblical principle (Footnote: God would rather the people go hungry and suffer the consequences themselves, than that the government interfere in these matters, either by punishing the delinquents—which would cost the state much resources for penitentiaries, enforcement of justice and the time and money spent in going through the whole administrative process—or by giving aid, which is currently the American government's second highest expenditure next to the army, and is approximately the same case in the Netherlands. #todo/opzoeken/reference  
The responsibility to work is with the people themselves, and for those who cannot work, the people should take care of, voluntarily and from the heart. Dinesh D'Souza #tags/famouspeople devoted a whole chapter on this topic in one of his books #tags/books , perhaps *The Big Lie* #todo/opzoeken using the example of Obama on the white horse.). Rather than that the government should handle this on a state level, the people should handle this on a church level and even before that within the family—which is always the right order of dealing with issues of any kind, by the way.
So if in a family a child (or an adult child) refuses to study or work, the *parents* not only should, but must handle correctively and refuse the child any food until he acquiesces with the given rules of the house, which is that of the Bible. If this (adult) child asks the church for help ( #todo/opzoeken diaconie) the church must refuse him because of his incorrect behavior, and lastly the local, provincial and state government should do the same. 
The problem with this approach in practise is that people are too soft-hearted. They know what it feels like to be hungry and so they cannot get it over their hearts to let anyone else suffer from it. However, the problem here lies in the fact that the people actually do *not know* hunger is. If people have ever fasted they would realize that this hunger of the first few days is far from real hunger and the change of metabolism that takes place after going for weeks without food. This is one of the reasons why it is important for Christians to fast. #tags/fasting 
As a matter of fact this behavior of "Christians" is the whole problem why there is so much sin in the church, namely because most local congregations do not punish their members like a father does his children. The leaders of the churches do not correctly take upon themselves the role of the spiritual father and when they do take upon themselves the role of some kind of father, it is that of a current day Western post-modern father whom his child treats as a friend, who can be called by his first name and even be shown aggression in disagreements. 
This kind of behavior is not surprisingly even incorporated in children's movies #tags/movies such as *Space Jam: the new legacy* starring #tags/famouspeople LeBron James as a father who needs to save his child. In the movie he has a disobedient child who simply walks away whenever he does not want to talk to his father, who does not stop (walking away) when his father tells him to, who accusingly and rudely speaks to his father and tells him that he hates basketball because of him. In the end it is the father who has to apologize to his son before the son realizes the father's love for him and his intentions and change his ways. 
Now it is true that James was not a perfect father and he *should* change his ways, but the son should apologize for not obeying his father in doing the things he should have done, which the father instructed him to do (such as basketball training), for hiding the fact that he would go to a designer's camp (for programmers), for being rude to his father when speaking to him, for walking away when being spoken to etc. None of these apologies were shown as moral lessons for children, even though it is a *children's* movie. #church/material/sermon
We can conclude that this verse concerns *our behavior* towards our family and local church members and that *we* need to change and become more like the Father we have in heaven, whatever role we have in life (cf. Colossians 4:1). 

*11 For we hear that some among you walk in idleness, not busy at work, but ::busybodies::. 12 Now such persons we command and encourage in the Lord Jesus Christ to do their work ::quietly:: and to earn their own living.*

These **busybodies** may be interpreted as people who are just hanging around, acting like they are being busy or actually are being busy but not with their own business but with others' and slowing down other people's work in the process. Paul is not extensive in his explanation considering dealing with these people, but simply **command[s] and encourage[s] in the Lord Jesus Christ to do their work quietly**. 
So first of all he emphasizes that this is a **command** and not merely an advise or guideline. People *must never* become busybodies. In the Netherlands, although perhaps not strictly being implemented, there is a law concerning hanging on street corners. The police is allowed to disband groups hanging at places for no specific reason. Groups are not allowed to hang for no reason, they are occupying playgrounds meant for children or seats and benches meant for the elderly, they could be making plans for criminal activities and they could be damaging government property such as abovesaid benches and playgrounds, with knives, keys, graffiti and also by using skateboards to slide over edges and damaging those. There has never been a group (as far as I know) that comes together with good intentions, for good purposes and then fulfill those purposes. Young children might come together with plans to make the world better, but when they do, they will quickly go behind the drawing table to work out their plans, instead of staying on the streets without any pen and paper to come with real plans. 
Within the church the impact of this behavior goes even further than mere damage of property, but it could bring division within relations as well. For no one likes to be told what to do or to be interfered when doing his work. For Christians their work within the church is also the fulfillment of God's commands. This means that busybodies are disturbing holy work! 
I have seen, unfortunately in the Chinese church I used to go to, that a woman was so busy minding everybody's business—in the choir for example, telling how things should be, even though she did have that role—not merely advising, but pushing for things to take place her way, that in the end no one wanted her to participate in any event and none of the five local churches wanted her in her church. However, none of these people dared actually say to her face what she was doing wrong. First of all because they are Chinese people, but second of all because she was the pastor's wife. What was even more difficult was how they should treat the pastor himself. The people loved him and would have liked to have him to minister in their local congregation, however, they did not want his wife to be involved there. Furthermore, the people did tell the highest person in office, the senior pastor, but he was afraid or too soft-hearted (cf. notes on vv.6-10) to relieve the pastor from his office because he could not manage his own house (cf. 1 Timothy 3:4-5). And actually it was due to this pastor's (not the senior pastor) personality—he also was very soft-hearted—that he could not control the urges of his wife to keep her words to herself, but also due to his behavior, for perhaps it was that he wanted to escape the home and spend his time helping churches, leaving his wife alone, that his wife became more of a busybody than she already was. 
The second thing Paul tells us here is to **encourage** these busybodies. I assume these busybodies have not become what they are out of free will. Some may find it more interesting to meddle with other people's business than to work, but this is probably because they are bored. That is why it is usually women who do not need to work, or whose husbands have died or older women who have nothing to do who are most infamous for gossiping (cf. #todo/opzoeken/reference  Paul's warning concerning gossiping, in Corinthians ?). When we encourage these people to work and find work they are content with ( #todo/opzoeken/reference  Ephesians 4:11?), or otherwise teach them to be content with any kind of work ( #todo/opzoeken/reference Colossians 3:21?), they will become much better people, and if they are believers, become better Christians as well. 
Paul is not saying that all of these people need to get a job. Sometimes a woman has the privileged position not to have to work because her husband does, but Paul says that each has to work to "earn" their living. Children too, for example will get by by their parents, but that does not mean they do not need to do anything to earn it. So both children and women need to work, either voluntarily or for a salary and earn their living. Nothing is for free in this life, except the grace of God, but aside from that, each will need to work hard and earn their living. Discipline comes at the cost of hard work, knowledge comes from studying, love and patience come from working with those who are hurt and have become unloving.

*13 As for you, brothers, do not grow weary in doing good. 14 If anyone does not obey what we say in this letter, take note of that person, and have nothing to do with him, that he may be ashamed. 15 Do not regard him as an enemy, but warn him as a brother.*

In the previous verses Paul instructed Christians to command and *encourage* those who did not follow Paul's commands. Here he instructs us to **have nothing to do with him**. How does encouragement line up with a separation from this brother? The answer is that encouragement is the first step of the process of bringing a sinful brother back to the Christian life, but if he *persists* in disobedience then our next hope is that **he may be ashamed**. 
This is all part of the process of #todo/opzoeken/engels tucht as described in ( #todo/opzoeken/reference 1 Corinthians and elsewhere? Matthew ). Note, however, that both actions can be imposed but must be actively embraced by the subject. It is not possible to make anyone feel ashamed, no matter how hard we try, and it is not possible to make anyone feel encouraged, no matter how hard we encourage this person. 
Many traditional churches try to enforce this behavior and treat the subject **as an enemy** rather than **as a brother**. The movie *Chocolat* #tags/movies starring Johnny Depp #tags/famouspeople/actors for example depicts life in a French village in the previous century where a old traditional church is governed by legalism. The female protagonist brings humility and compassion through her chocolate patissery #todo/opzoeken/engels , just like this verse indicates how things should take place. People should be encouraged externally, but motived internally from their conscience. 
Unfortunately the movie plummets to the other end of the spectrum to progressiveness and liberalism by allowing the breaking of rules, illegitimate sex and approving all of that, which is what happens in today's (and that of the last decades') churches as well. The people have the tendency to turn the reformed church into an extreme rightwing conservative church or into a liberal leftwing one, but have problems maintaining the delicate balance between the two. 
Of course this is partially because of the thrust needed to set oneself off against the status quo and that the momentum of this thrust causes one to pass one's actual goal, and it is really difficult given the dynamic situation of life, politics and the spirit of time (zeitgeist #todo/opzoeken/engels ) to estimate where one lands. However, there is more at play here. *First of all*, the Bible should be one's guide—at all times, at any time in history, in the future and in any culture. The Church must never emphasize one command over the other. Granted, Paul emphasized sexual immorality and different kinds of hospitality in his epistle to the Ephesians, and the authors of the Gospels wrote down more of Jesus' quotes concerning money and hell than about sexual immorality and heaven, but we do not know what Jesus emphasized in real life, and Paul was addressing certain issues. 
In most churches today *inclusiveness* for example is a characterizing trait, even mentioned on the frontpage of their websites, as I encountered in an international church in Paris, France. There were black and white pastors, both male and female. As a guest I was allowed to participate in the Holy Supper even though they did not know whether I was a Christian or not. Also, the "sermon" was about racism, white supremacy and the ignorance of white Christians. Now maybe this was because I just happened to arrive in something called  "the Inclusiveness Project" (or something like that), but I felt this was more than just a quarterly or yearly theme. 
Other examples of an over-emphasis on certain themes are that of discipleship and church planting through the Disciple Making Movement (DMM), which all are good themes, but should be entreated with the same amount of attention as that of sanctification, the teaching of doctrine and all other themes in the Bible. 
*Second of all*, it is the soft-heartedness of people *again* that has led to inclusivity within churches, going even further than overemphasis and leading up the trespass of God's commands, such as in the abovementioned church where women were allowed to become pastors, and now pastors shave their heads and tattoo themselves in order to fit in with their target audience (e.g. people from the street and addicts) up to the point where even homosexuals are wed and are allowed to become pastors.

#church/material/sermon

Conclusion: people make the church either go left or right, but alway deviating from the goal of God, which is because of an overshoot, which in turn is caused by not taking the Bible as their guide but the problem of that time #todo/opzoeken/engels  (I made that own mistake as well, when in the CCGN church #todo/nogaftemaken ) and their soft-heartedness which is just as sinful as being hard-hearted. 

As a conclusion of the theme of soft-heartedness: 
* Follow the commands of God (Let them go hungry)
* Instruct the commands of God (Command)
* Do not overemphasize any command of God (Do not fall for the needs of others)

Songs: 
* Create in me a clean heart 
* Ik dank U wel, mijn Vader 
* OPW411 Geprezen zij de Here

***Benediction***
*16 Now may the Lord of peace himself give you peace at all times in every way. The Lord be with you all.*
*17 I, Paul, write this greeting with my own hand. This is the sign of ::genuineness:: in every letter of mine; it is the way I write. 18 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all.*

#biblestudy/devotionals/2thessalonians

