# 20230101 
#tags/bible/john
I truly wish everyone that you may be the light of Christ. 
John 8 is such a big text, so that I will only focus on v.12. 

Speaking of light, we are in the winter months right now. And there is literally less light, some like it and some don't, but research has shown that in those months, that people have seasonal affective disorder (SAD), and that's what you will feel like: sad. people will have less joy and gladness in this season, and the solution is to have at least 30 minutes of light, of have your house full of light. 
But I want to share something  with you today, which is much worse than SAD and much better than 30 minutes of sunlight, and that is that the whole world is in a "SAD"-condition, and that is SIN-ADDICTION-DISORDER. 
We are addicted to sin and that's why we are living in the darkness, and that's why we need Jesus , not only for 30 minutes but for all of our life. 
Perhaps you're going through a dark winter month right now 

Let's read 
> 12 Then Jesus again spoke to them, saying, “I am the Light of the world; he who follows Me will never walk in the darkness, but will have the Light of life.”  

What does this mean? 
“I am the Light of the world
and how can we spread this? 

# Part 1. What does this mean? 
If someone were to say today in church "I am the Light", it would be absurd. No one can say this except for God. If this is not true, then Jesus is a liar, he would be mad, or He would truly be the Lord. 

So the meaning of "I am the Light of the world" I will explain. 
The setting (context) is that Jesus has a confrontation with the darkness of people who don't understand him  . We see that the Jews were angry with Him, because  among others he healed on the Sabbath, and He said certain things, and then at the end of Chapter 8, He said: 
> Truly, truly, I say to you, before Abraham was, I am.”  
which is blasphemy. 
So they took up rocks and wanted to kill him. 
This is a cosmic delict, a clash between light and darkness. 

The world has not understood the light, and so the Jews did not understand Him. 
A preacher once said: when we read Chapter 8 we read about the relationship he has with the Father, he speaks on behalf of the Father, he is one with the Father— his relationship is proof that is He is from the Father. 
Light also means that He is the Giver of life, whether  physical or spiritual—without  Jesus there is no life. If you do not have or know Jesus you have no life. 
Then you'll still walk in darkness. So the light reveals the ultimate truth. And John says in 1 John that in Him there is no darkness. 
And all of this occurred during the Feast of Tabernacles, and this makes everything  more interesting. because there the Jews remembered the happenings in the Exodus and they remembered the pillar of light (fire) as well. The temple was completely in light as well.
So God led the people  out of the desert with light, and now Jesus says: "I am the light of the World" and so He is saying that He is that light and He is God Himself. 
Isaiah  9:1
Isaiah 9:2 (ESV) 2 The people who walked in darkness
have seen a great light;
those who dwelt in a land of deep darkness,
on them has light shone.

This light belongs to Him, for He is the true light. He unmasks the darkness of sin on the one hand , but He also makes the world better. For His light will give us eternal joy. 
It is good news but still the world rejects this message. 
> John 3:19 (ESV) 19 And this is the judgment: the light has come into the world, and people loved the darkness rather than the light because their works were evil.  

**Example.**  IN india there was a big rock, and under this rock there were so many insects, and when they lifted up this rock, all of the bugs went: help! panic, because they were not used to the light. 
But when the rock was placed down again, the bugs went on as if nothing had ever happened. 
This is the character of man, we avoid these situations. In the same way Jesus spoke to Nicodemus: you need to be born again. 
Jesus said in Matthew 5: if light within you is darkness, how great must your darkness not be? 

Jesus said: you will die in your sin. And look at how the Jews respond/. They do not understand at all what Jesus is talking about. If we read Chapter 8 well, very well, we see that the Jews do not understand that Jesus claims who He says he is. 
In v.24 Jesus says that everyone  who sins  is a slave to sin. And the Jews responded: We are children of Abraham . They didn't understand, they thought they were good enough, and if one is family of Abraham , then everyone is ok. 
In the same way we can go to church. On the outside you look like a Christian, your Parents take you to church, but you could be walking in darkness. 


A Pastor Ferguson said: there was a bird, beautiful, red, etc. but he didn't see any movement. And this is was because the bird was dead. 
You have to do what you claim to be. So how about you. 
What I'm going to say is me in the past tense. 


Yes, i believe in Jesus, but I rather read the New Testament. 
I believe in Jesus but i don't believe in hell. 
There was a time when I was influenced by Jehova's Witnesses. But Jesus spoke more about hell than about heaven. So let us not form Jesus to our own thoughts. 
You will start believing in  shadow Jesus. 

**Example.** In Chicago the police needed to turn off the lights on the streets. Why? A lady saw in the shadow of a tree Jesus, and so a lot of people went there, about 250 people, and things got dangerous. 

And in the same way we can form our own Jesus, and this is Jesus. We need the true light, but how do we receive this? 

# Part 2. Follow the light
> he who follows Me will never walk in the darkness, but will have the Light of life.”  

You have to believe Him for Who He says He is. 
IN my past I was looking for the truth, but I had a false Jesus in mind. I couldn't believe that He was the only way. It cost me a lot of time before I could really believe in a Jesus who really was Who He claimed to be. 
If you read Chapter 8, did you know that Jesus says most of the whole Bible: "I am". 
If you really believe in Who He is, then you too can say: "I am... His"! 
But what is true faith? You believe, once saved, always saved? I have said the sinners' prayer? Is that it? I want to warn you, if you claim to believe in Jesus Christ, but you have no longing to live a holy life, or to obey Him, then you need to research your heart. For Jesus said in v.31 in the same chapter
> If you abide in My word, then you are truly My disciples; 32 and you will know the truth, and the truth will make you free.”  

"abide in My word" is not temporarily, it is eternal, it is to "stay" in Him and in His word, and then you will live. the Holy Spirit will then come live in to you, and the Holy Spirit  will then be like a general who will say: forward, march. 
It is a war against our own desires, and against everything  that doesn't glorify Jesus. 
I am still thinking about brother Jeffrey's testimony, about how he beat up his PlayStations. But the battle against sin, stays a battle. It is like a rollercoaster. You'll go up, but afterwardsm you'll go down again. 
In this victory, you'll discover that you're a greater sinner than you ever thought you were, but in at the same time you realize that Jesus can give you the power to overcome all this sin. 
For God have made you into a new creatoin, and placed you from the dark to the light. 
Colossians 1:13. 
And if you follow Him, then you have Jesus Himself, He will be your shepherd, your provider, his vengeance will not be on you anymore. All things will be new, and this is the best present you can ever get. If you have Jesus , you have everything, for even if you are the richest person ever, but if you don't have Jesus, you have nothing. 

Spurgeon said: It is like you're following the sun. If you follow it, it will never get dark. 
And in all of your brokenness, your life will not be dominated or characterized by your sin. No you have a new nature, and you're not like a clean pig who falls into the mud and stays in it, no, you're like a cat, who falls in the mud, and wants to jump out of it. 
You will not look up the boundaries of how many movies you can watch or how my hours of YouTube you can watch. No, you want to stay away from these boundaries. 
See also John Newton's song: Amazing ~Grace.

In the same way Jesus says that we are the light: 
Matthew 5:16: be the light, and spread the light. 

> Matthew 5:16 (ESV) 16 In the same way, let your light shine before others, so that they may see your good works and give glory to your Father who is in heaven.  

It is important to know that Jesus is the source of the light, just like the moon reflects the light of the sun. Following Jesus is important because  you need to be a good witness to the world. 
The Jews in the time of Jesus did not fulfill God's heart. They were not missionary, and they didn't spread the gospel. 
John says that the good news and the light will spread outside of the walls of Jerusalem, not only for the Jews, but for the whole world. The long awaited messiah, the light, only have one mission, for two peoples. 
1. To gather Israel and to 
2. bring the gentiles to Him 

Isaiah prophecies this in Isaiah 49:6

> Isaiah 49:6 (ESV) 6 he says:  
> “It is too light a thing that you should be my servant  
to raise up the tribes of Jacob
and to bring **back** the preserved of Israel;
I will make you as a light for the nations,
that my salvation may reach to the end of the earth.”

This is recovery for Israel, 
In Dutch it says: "I will make you **too**"
So you can see the two targets. But we need t be careful that we do not make the same mistake as the jews and think about: Is this for me as well? We're so much thinking about ourselves and the ones around us, but our target and mission is to go out into the world

But think about the brokenness in the neighborhood around us. There are people who think: finally Christmas  is over, my own family has not even visited me. 
There are people  who have existential questions who think about: who am I, Why am I sitting here? 
There are people who believe in other gods. 
For this world is in the grasp of the lie, of sin, it is choking in death, and liek Augustine said: the heart of man is restless (until it has found Jesus). 

We will do some activities today, we will spread (some kind of pancakes) to the our neighbors here. 
This is all great. 
Like Paul said: (think about the Netherlands

> 2 Corinthians 4:4 (ESV) 4 In their case the god of this world has blinded the minds of the unbelievers, to keep them from seeing the light of the gospel of the glory of Christ, who is the image of God.  

The devil uses false lights to make people blind and that leads to death. 
Did you know there is a phenomenon in the swamp where people  see all kinds of lights. They think it is UFO, or methane gas. And people follow these lights and then all of a sudden the light disappears and a new one appears. And every  year people die. 
And they think that these lights will bring hope, ;but they are false lights. 
But we need to show them the true light of Jesus Christ. for His light will never disappear. Don't we want everyone to have this light. That's why as a congregation of Christ, we need to spread this light. 
And when we say this, we're thinking about 
* evangelizing
* doing good works

but do not forget That Jesus also said: 

> John 13:35 (ESV) By this all people will know that you are my disciples, if you have love for one another.”  

So if we have love for one another then the world sees that we are His disciples. We want to do, but being a Christian is not about doing. It is because  of what He has done for us, that we do for Him. 
If the vertical relationship (with God ) is good, then our horizontal relationship will be good as well (read 1 Corinthians 13). 
For this is underemphasized. 
And in this new year, many people have good intentions new year's resolutions)
We need to love each other as brothers and sisters, fiery, so that we can show that we are His disciples, and so let us destroy the monsters in our life that destroy the unity between us. 
The world is looking at us. So we need to work on this first, for otherwise we will give the world the wrong image. 

**Example.** A butcher saw a dog and he chased it away. And so all of a sudden, he saw that the dog had a note in his mouth. The note said: three pieces of chicken, 15 euros. 
But this is so strange. And he gives the food to the dog, the dog went on the bus. The dog wants to enter a house, but the door does not open. The man in the house hits the dog. 
But the butcher had followed the dog, and now says: what are you doing? The dog is a genius? 
No, he is not a genius. The dog owner said. Because he has forgotten his keys for the so manieth time. 

And so if we do things in the wrong way, we will have conflicts. 
I want to say that I have failed badly in this. 

There was a time when I was a recent convert, and while I was writing this sermon. On the one hand  I am really ashamed. I thought differently than a brother did (the pastor). I truly thought I was right. And what I did, was speaking negatively about him. While eating with  others, I did that. I really thought I was wrong. 
But when looking back, on the one hand I was late at night before erotic clubs, spreading the World. But on the other hand I was spreading darkness within the Church. 
I was rescuing people for Jesus outside of the walls of the church, but I was persecuting Jesus inside the walls of the church. 
And that has broken me. 
I can tell you one thing: I feel 100% unworthy to be His savior. 
And so if you tell me: "Sam, you are not worthy to be a preacher." I say: "Amen. I am even worth less than that. But by the grace of God I can stand here." 
Ken Saunders said that even good longings can develop into controlling demands, or idols that can change us into something until we get what we want." 
But if we serve one another and that we do not always get what we want, and if we serve the head of the Church, Jezus Christus, and if we can comprise, then we will give love the honorable (first) place. And love is the sign that we are His servants.

> Philippians 2:15 (ESV) 15 that you may be blameless and innocent, children of God without blemish in the midst of a crooked and twisted generation, among whom you shine as lights in the world,  

But Sam, can God use me? I am introverted, I have no talent, i cannot play an instrument, I cannot remember well, I'm afraid to evangelize, my parents have rejected. 
But I have news for you: You are the light of the world if Jesus lives in you. 
Look at the disciples: Peter was short tempered
Matthew  was a tax collected 
And all the disciple left Jesus when he was persecuted. If God  could use them, then who are you to say that God cannot use you? 

If you're still doubting then I want to encourage you. 
**Example.** Dr. Geisler preached and then he heard someone cry, but he couldn't see who it was, it could've been a boy. And it was a lamp that was shining in his eyes. 
So after the service, a boy went to him, with the syndrome of Down. 
Did you hear me cry? He asked. 
Yes, why did you cry. 
Yes, you said that Jesus has to use me, but I am sick, I have medicines, and I am fat. Can Jesus use me?


Dr Geisler asked: have you accepted Jesus as your Savior of your life? 
Yes. 
Then he gave him tracts to spread out on the streets. 

And years later he saw someone who was a Christian, and he said: do you remember this boy who was sick? Yes, he said. He is now visiting hospitals and bringing so many people  to Christ. He is the best witness of our whole church! 

There will be a day that Jesus will cover the whole Earth with his glory and there will be no more seasons. 
And on that day we will have no more Sin Addiction Disorders, but we will be surrounded by the light of God Himself. 
Do you think it is strange that God said: there was light, even before He created the sun? 

But until this day, let us walk and see Jesus for who He is. and Say: I am His. 
Let us never walk in darkness again, and He promises to bring us home safely. 
and let us love each other fiery, so that we can spread the message , which is: 
that Jesus had to suffer so that as the first one resurrected, he could bring us to life as well. 

# Holy Supper
In this new year (even though it's only in the Gregorian calendar) I want to ask you to research your heart, and if we celebrate the Holy Supper. What I have just preached from, the Word of God, means that we need to love each other more intensely. This is essential, the first step. 
The Christian step is not "do, do, do" but what He has done. 
This is God's way to work in us. So research your heart: in what can I grow to love my brother more. And so we always need to look at what Jesus has done for us. Where can I grow, who can I forgive , what can I let go? For when Jesus died on the cross, there was darkness. But he rose from the dead, and there was darkness, but he took our sins with him into the grave, so that we would not be judged, but can walk in the light. Do you long to represent Jesus Christus in a way that represents Him? 
Let us be quiet to research your hearts in the new year. A fresh start, the old has gone, the new has come, to walk together in unity. 

I say: I want to walk together with my brother and sister. I stretch out my hand, but you will need to take my hand then. 

#church/sermons/@samjayasinghe

#biblestudy/devotionals/acts