# Acts 25 (ESV)
***Paul Appeals to Caesar***
*1 Now three days after Festus had arrived in the province, he went up to Jerusalem from Caesarea. 2 And the chief priests and the principal men of the Jews laid out their case against Paul, and they urged him, 3 asking as a ::favor:: against Paul that he summon him to Jerusalem—because they were planning an ambush to kill him on the way.*

In Acts 23:26 we see Lysias showing his best side to Felix by even changing some of the facts concerning what happened during the arrest of Paul. In Acts 24:2-3 the Jews address Felix with respect and gratitude and though there may be some gratitude for the peace there currently is in Israel, it is a *Pax Romana*, i.e. a peace as long as one obeys the Roman government, regardless of the amount of taxes one has to pay. In their hearts the resent the ruling of the Roman government and they have no gratitude at all. In the last verse of the previous chapter (Acts 24:27) we see that Felix wanted to do the Jews a favor and therefore let Paul remain in prison, even though he was not convinced of Paul's guilt. Festus as well wanted to favor the Jews by sending Paul to Jerusalem, because they wanted to ambush Paul on the way. We can assume that Festus did not know or suspect this ambush, for he would never let one of his prisoners be killed by an outsider at the penalty of capital punishment for himself and his crew. Festus too, however, could not find anything deserving death (v.25). Festus then did a favor to king Herod Agrippa II by receiving him with pomp (v.23) and what not more—not only because he was his brother in law. Each person was selfish and only out for their own good. 

*4 Festus replied that Paul was being kept at Caesarea and that he himself intended to go there shortly. 5 “So,” said he, “let the men of authority among you go down with me, and if there is anything wrong about the man, let them bring charges against him.”*

These men of authority were not even able to bring a charge against Paul. They had so much knowledge of studying the Bible that they could be deemed as lawyers or judges in this age. Yet, they could not understand that the sin of blasphemy, though a capital crime in Biblical law, does not apply to pagans and cannot be used in a pagan court. It is just like fornication or adultery. In the laws of Western countries there is no law for that. The only law I know about is that a divorce on the basis of adultery will grant the spouse no alimony. 
In North-Carolina in a few other states, however, there are some laws that partially address this. See https://www.divorceistough.com/blog/my-spouse-committed-adultery-can-i-sue-for-emotional-distress/ for more information. 

*6 After he stayed among them not more than eight or ten days, he went down to Caesarea. And the next day he took his seat on the tribunal and ordered Paul to be brought. 7 When he had arrived, the Jews who had come down from Jerusalem stood around him, bringing many and serious charges against him that they could not prove. 8 Paul argued in his defense, “Neither against the law of the Jews, nor against the temple, nor against Caesar have I committed any offense.”*

#todo/opzoeken  ::See notes in Chromebook::

*9 But Festus, wishing to do the Jews a favor, said to Paul, “Do you wish to go up to Jerusalem and there be tried on these charges before me?”*

In verse 17 Festus explains the reason why he did not deliver Paul over to the Jews, which is that Paul needed to have a fair trial first. But still, this fair trial could have taken place in Jerusalem. What changed Festus' mind that he asks Paul whether he wants to go to Jerusalem, while earlier he decided to see Paul in Caesarea? He could have saved himself and his troops the trouble of traveling all the way there, but doing the Jews this favor in advance. From the text one could interpret that Festus had business to do in Caesarea anyway. He first went to Caesarea when he arrived in the province, to take over Felix' position and receive a hand-over of formalities, then to Jerusalem, perhaps as a formality, as the capital of Judea, and also for other businesses, and lastly to retreat himself to his official working location, which again was Caesarea. So perhaps it had always been Festus' intention to please the Jews, but before he had seen Paul it had seemed more efficient that the Jewish authorities went to Caesarea with him than for Festus to remain in Jerusalem merely for judging Paul's trial which was only one of the many tasks a prefect (see also https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Judea_(Roman_province)#Under_a_prefect_(6%E2%80%9341)) had to do. 

*10 But Paul said, “I am standing before Caesar's tribunal, where I ought to be tried. To the Jews I have done no wrong, as you yourself know very well.*

Paul makes the point here that he should be tried before Caesar's tribunal and not the Jewish one. In his letter #todo/opzoeken  to the ?? however, he writes that matters between brothers should be handled by brothers and not by pagans, not only because it is a bad testimony, but also because it has nothing to do with them. For how could a pagan judge which party is right in a theological matter when he has no knowledge nor the Spirit to guide him? In this case especially, no one can discern that Jesus is the Messiah except those who have been given the Spirit (see John 3:3ee) so how could Festus or Caesar ever resolve the matter of whether the Christian doctrine is true? 
Perhaps Paul is aiming for something else here. First of all, we already know he is aiming to speak to Caesar, as he was commanded to by God. Second of all, he is not discussing anything theological here—although he is proclaiming the Gospel—he is merely claiming that what he is saying does not deserve the death penalty according to Roman "secular" law. If he were judged by a Jewish tribunal, it would also not deserve the death penalty, not even under Moses' Law, for what he says is in line with Moses' Law and the resurrection of the dead is not contradictory to it, even before Ezekiel or anyone else had spoken of it. However, this Jewish tribunal, the current Sanhedrin, was biased and corrupt and would kill a man because of jealousy alone—which was the case in Jesus' trial. 

*11 If then I am a wrongdoer and have committed anything for which I deserve to die, I do not seek to escape death. But if there is nothing to their charges against me, no one can give me up to them. I appeal to Caesar.”*

A paraphrase of verses 8-11 will perhaps explain why Festus asks Paul whether he wants to be tried in Jerusalem. 
So in verse 8 Paul was saying: "I have not committed any sin against God or against the Jews. I have most certainly not committed any sin against Caesar, that is not even what the charge was about. So why are we here in Caesarea and why is this handled by you, Festus?"
Upon which Festus replied: "So, do you think you should be tried in Jerusalem then, because that place better fits the charges? It will still fall under me, however, because this case has already been brought to me." Festus, of course, was not trying to please Paul by changing the location, but he was actually trying to please the Jews. 
Paul then replies: "No, I am standing before the tribunal Caesar now, so I should be tried here. I have not done any wrong to the Jews—and you know that very well—and now that this case has been appealed from the Jewish Court (the Sanhedrin) to a higher court (the Judean court), let us do it here."
He continues with verse 11 then as follows. "I know that this court is more serious and will incur the death penalty if I have done anything wrong, but so be it. Better yet, I even want to appeal to Caesar. If this court cannot even decide to set me free, while it knows that I am innocent (because of its corruptness), then I will have to appeal to an even higher court, where the emperor himself is judge."

*12 Then Festus, when he had conferred with his council, answered, “To Caesar you have appealed; to Caesar you shall go.”*

***Paul Before Agrippa and Bernice***
*13 Now when some days had passed, Agrippa the king and Bernice arrived at Caesarea and greeted Festus. 14 And as they stayed there many days, Festus laid Paul's case before the king, saying, “There is a man left prisoner by Felix, 15 and when I was at Jerusalem, the chief priests and the elders of the Jews laid out their case against him, asking for a sentence of condemnation against him. 16 I answered them that it was not the custom of the Romans to give up anyone before the accused met the accusers face to face and had opportunity to make his defense concerning the charge laid against him.*

Festus here answers the question of why he did not hand over Paul to the Jews, but not why wanted to try Paul in Caesarea instead of Jerusalem. Most likely, as mentioned in the notes on v.8, this is because he had other business in Caesarea and did not wish to stay this long in Jerusalem right after his arrival and the start of his prefecture. 

*17 So when they came together here, I made no delay, but on the next day took my seat on the tribunal and ordered the man to be brought. 18 When the accusers stood up, they brought no charge in his case of such evils as I supposed. 19 Rather they had certain points of dispute with him about their own religion and about a certain Jesus, who was dead, but whom Paul asserted to be alive.*

So when the Jews had spoken to Festus in Jerusalem they had apparently exaggerated their claims or they were very vague about what Paul had done in the sense of causing riots and all. But here in court, they could not bring charges of serious crimes without backing these up with evidence. They still lied about Paul blaspheming the temple and their religion, though, but to Festus—even if these things were true—this was no evil and he rather saw it as a dispute. 

*20 Being at a loss how to investigate these questions, I asked whether he wanted to go to Jerusalem and be tried there regarding them. 21 But when Paul had appealed to be kept in custody for the decision of the emperor, I ordered him to be held until I could send him to Caesar.” 22 Then Agrippa said to Festus, “I would like to hear the man myself.” “Tomorrow,” said he, “you will hear him.”*
*23 So on the next day Agrippa and Bernice came with great pomp, and they entered the audience hall with the military tribunes and the prominent men of the city. Then, at the command of Festus, Paul was brought in. 24 And Festus said, “King Agrippa and all who are present with us, you see this man about whom the whole Jewish people petitioned me, both in Jerusalem and here, shouting that he ought not to live any longer.*

Apparently the Sanhedrin had spread their lies and stirring up the riots in a very efficient way. Even in Caesarea there were many Jewish people shouting for Paul's death, while the people in Caesarea would not even know him. According to the storyline Paul merely visited Philip, though for many days (see Acts 21:10), but nothing is told of their evangelism in that city. 

*25 But I found that he had done nothing deserving death. And as he himself appealed to the emperor, I decided to go ahead and send him. 26 But I have nothing definite to write to my lord about him. Therefore I have brought him before you all, and especially before you, King Agrippa, so that, after we have examined him, I may have something to write. 27 For it seems to me unreasonable, in sending a prisoner, not to indicate the charges against him.”*

Festus did not know what to write to Nero because there were no clear charges that were proven or corroborated by facts or witnesses with consistent testimonies. This is why Agrippa was brought in detail the matter by another hearing so that he could write down specific charges. However, even Agrippa could not find anything worth punishing for. Paul would even have been set free (see Acts 26:32). 
Festus had made a mistake then by allowing Paul to go to Nero (in verse 12) without backing the charges against him first. How he eventually still let Paul go is unknown. Justus' letter to Felix has been written here by Luke—it is even unknown how Luke got a hold of that—but the book of Acts also seems to end before the letter was handed over Nero. See also notes on [Acts 28:30](bear://x-callback-url/open-note?id=A248D865-A739-4428-8C2E-68006130D19C-3290-000012CCBC3A614E) for a possible explanation. 

#biblestudy/devotionals/acts
