# Acts 20 (ESV) 
***Paul in Macedonia and Greece***
*1 After the uproar ceased, Paul sent for the disciples, and after encouraging them, he said farewell and departed for Macedonia. 2 When he had gone through those regions and had given them much encouragement, he came to Greece. 3 There he spent three months, and when a ::plot:: was made against him by the Jews as he was about to set sail for Syria, he decided to return through Macedonia.*

Paul had to change his plans because of this plot made against him. 

*4 Sopater the Berean, son of Pyrrhus, accompanied him; and of the Thessalonians, Aristarchus and Secundus; and Gaius of Derbe, and Timothy; and the Asians, Tychicus and Trophimus. 5 These went on ahead and were waiting for us at Troas, 6 but we sailed away from Philippi after the days of Unleavened Bread, and in five days we came to them at Troas, where we stayed for seven days.*

***Eutychus Raised from the Dead***
*7 On the first day of the week, ::when we were gathered together to break bread::, Paul talked with them, intending to depart on the next day, and he prolonged his speech until midnight.*

This is a clue or even proof that the bread was broken every week on the first day, which is Sunday. 

*8 There were many lamps in the upper room where we were gathered.*

Why would Luke mention the many lamps? Would it have been so hot because of the oil lamps that Eutychus went sitting at the window? Or is Luke implying that it was so late that they needed the light. He already implied that by saying that it was until midnight that Paul spoke. 	

*9 And a young man named Eutychus, sitting at the window, sank into a deep sleep as Paul talked still longer. And being overcome by sleep, he fell down from the third story and was taken up dead. 10 But Paul went down and bent over him, and taking him in his arms, said, “Do not be alarmed, for his life is in him.” 11 And when Paul had gone up and had broken bread and eaten, he conversed with them a long while, until daybreak, and so departed. 12 And they took the youth away alive, and were not a little comforted.*

Paul's speech was until midnight, after which the event with Eutychus probably happened, but their conversation was until daybreak. For sure, no one would be able or willing to go to sleep after having witnessed such a miracle. 
The breaking of the bread right after having raised Eutychus back to life would serve as an extra powerful statement of the symbol of taking the bread and wine, for these also symbolize the resurrection in which Christians believe, and now that God had shown this to the Christians, it was more than a mere hope, it was a realistic and spirit-filled hope. 

*13 But going ahead to the ship, we set sail for Assos, intending to take Paul aboard there, for so he had arranged, intending himself to go by land. 14 And when he met us at Assos, we took him on board and went to Mitylene.*

Assos could be reached by foot (about 40 kilometers) from Troas and would have likely taken the same amount of time by ship, since the ship would have to sail around the peninsula. In this case it would have been more effective if Paul did this part on foot, so that he could at least spend a few days extra on spreading the Gospel. 
So great was Paul's love for the lost that he not only left Israel—which was not his home country, but still a place where he would be comforted by the presence of other Christians, as opposed to the continuous threat in secular areas—but also continuously travelled to other cities making new friends everywhere, but never creating a new home and always saying goodbye to these friends after a relatively short time. 
He also worked hard and never received financial gifts as we will see later on, and would probably spend all of his time either on work or the mission, not leaving any or only little time for himself. Now, even those few days on the ship where he could come to rest would be spent on the mission. 

*15 And sailing from there we came the following day opposite Chios; the next day we touched at Samos; and the day after that we went to Miletus. 16 For Paul had decided to sail past Ephesus, so that he might not have to spend time in Asia, for he was hastening to be at Jerusalem, if possible, on the day of Pentecost.*

***Paul Speaks to the Ephesian Elders***
*17 Now from Miletus he sent to Ephesus and ::called the elders of the church:: to come to him.*

Here is a cultural difference. Paul sends for the elders while they were not even prepared for his arrival or even to leave their church. The situation and time must have let them understand that Paul did not have a lot of time, and besides, he had been and perhaps still was their leader and teacher, who had spent a *years* with them. It was only logical that one leaves aside one's tasks and comply with Paul's request because he was their teacher, but also because in those day one did not know whether one would see another again. 
This is different from the respect we show for our teachers in our Western culture, although Christianity does bring this back. This proves once again the Christian culture is the best culture for all peoples. 

*18 And when they came to him, he said to them:*
*“You yourselves know how I lived among you the whole time from the first day that I set foot in Asia, 19 serving the Lord with all humility and with tears and with trials that happened to me through the plots of the Jews; 20 how I did not shrink from declaring to you anything that was profitable, and teaching you in public and from house to house, 21 testifying both to Jews and to Greeks of repentance toward God and of faith in our Lord Jesus Christ.*

The situation seems strange here. An old friend or leader passes by and calls for elders from the church to make a days' long journey #todo/opzoeken   and starts off with telling about all he has done in the past few years. Why did he call them to come all this way just to tell them that? 
It is not merely telling, but it is the start of his discourse, which consists of three parts: 1. his defense that he has given them all the knowledge they needed (v.20e); 2. his upcoming imprisonment and afflictions and that he will never return (v.22e); 3. the upcoming turmoil caused by false teachers and wicked people (v25e). 
 
Paul's message is that there will be false teachers, but that he will not be around to help them and that they should be able to protect themselves with God's counsel. The false teachers will still get a foothold, but Paul lets them know that it is not due to a lack of knowledge, teaching or wisdom they have received from Paul.

Paul is not only speaking out of self-defense here, but also and especially out of love. His desire is that the Ephesians will not be harmed by the false teachers. 

*22 And now, behold, I am going to Jerusalem, constrained by the Spirit, not knowing what will happen to me there, 23 except that the Holy Spirit testifies to me in every city that imprisonment and afflictions await me. 24 But ::I do not account my life of any value nor as precious to ~myself~::, if only I may finish my course and the ministry that I received from the Lord Jesus, to testify to the gospel of the grace of God.*

In the KJV this is translated as

> *But none of these things move me, neither count I my life dear unto myself, so that I might finish my course with joy, and the ministry, which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the gospel of the grace of God.*  

where "with joy" has been added. The KJV uses a different Greek source, i.e. the *textus receptus* which was written by Erasmus in the twelfth century (see also  [https://christswords.com/content/greek-sources-greek-english](https://christswords.com/content/greek-sources-greek-english)  for more information) and was based on multiple Greek version and heavily influenced by the Latin Vulgate translation of the Bible. 

I am not sure of the translation of the phrase "if only" which is translated as "so that" by the KJV. If I have to accept this translation, the meaning of this verse would render to Paul being willing to account his life as not valuable if only he can testify for the Gospel. So in other words, he is willing to give up everything, including his life, for the Gospel.
The KJV translation would render the meaning of this verse to Paul not counting his life dear so that he can testify for the Gospel. In the KJV the accounting of his life is a stepping stone towards testifying of the Gospel while in the ESV it is a statement of what Paul is willing to do for the Gospel.

*25 And now, behold, I know that none of you among whom I have gone about proclaiming the kingdom will see my face again. 26 Therefore I testify to you this day that I am innocent of the blood of all, 27 for I did not shrink from declaring to you the ::whole counsel of God::.*

This whole counsel of God is the whole Gospel, not subtracting from or adding to it. #biblestudy/questions If anyone were to do anything wrong, spread a wrong or incomplete Gospel and be punished for it by God, Paul says that this is not his fault, for he declared the whole counsel of God. 
Paul is speaking of the things that will come in the near future, as we will also see in Revelations #todo/opzoeken and described in verses 29-30. If anything happened to the Ephesian Christians it would not be on Paul's head, for he had already taught them everything they needed to know. 

*28 Pay careful attention to yourselves and to all the flock, in which the Holy Spirit has made you overseers, to care for the church of God, which he obtained with his own blood. 29 I know that after my departure ::fierce wolves will come in among you::, not sparing the flock; 30 and ::from among your own selves will arise men speaking ~twisted things~::, to draw away the disciples after them. 31 Therefore be alert, remembering that for three years I did not cease night or day to admonish every one with tears.*

Paul adds in this comment not for his own defense, but to let the elders know how much he cared for them and their salvation and for the church of Christ to be protected from false doctrine. 
Perhaps he did not literally cry for three years long and did not admonish everyone day and night, but he does emphasize that this was his intention. 
In my previous church where I was a Sunday School teacher and elder, both the children, teenagers and adults knew I was like Paul, a strict person who would alway reprimand people for doing wrong things, not literally day and night, but almost always right on the spot and as often as I saw it. 
This led to a certain reputation where I was seen as the strict person, perhaps loveless, rational and without empathy. Also, people would not tell me about their dealings in life and distance themselves from me whenever they knew they were dealing with acts of sin in their life (outside of the Sunday Service). 
I admonished the congregation for the same reason as Paul did. I knew false teaching would come, be it in the form of wrong friends or (social) media and entertainment, and those people, whether Christian or not, would fall into the sin of this world of materialism and unlawful sex—partly because I had fallen in that trap as well. Eventually this turned out to be true for most of them, unfortunately. 
I did not have to defend myself and no one put blood on my head for not teaching the children or the congregation correctly, whenever a person was found out to sin. However, if I *had* defended myself as Paul had, and explained how I had taught them the full counsel of God and admonished them for ten years, then this work would have been appreciated much more and perhaps the results would have been greater as well. 

*32 And now I commend you to God and to the word of his grace, which is able to build you up and to give you the inheritance among all those who are sanctified.*

All Paul can do is to put it in God's hands. Knowing that these things will happen anyway might let us lose hope, but Paul has hope in God—that He will save—, that the Word will still build up the people and that God is gracious—that He will save some, even though they have listened and follow a wrong path. 
In our days these false teachers are surely present and there have been many Christians who have followed those false teachers. God, however, is gracious, and *might* save some #todo/opzoeken/engels of "a few" 
of those followers though they are on the wrong path and have not followed the Bible explicitly. 
**Example.** Take for example Joseph Prince, who teaches the *Prosperity Gospel* which is clearly false doctrine. I do believe, however, that some of his followers are actual Christians and do not know any better. They are sinful in spreading this erroneous Gospel themselves, but I believe, since they believe in God with all their heart, and the resurrection of Jesus Christ, that they will be saved—once again, I am only speaking of *some* people, for there are people who only "follow Christ" for prosperity. 

*33 I coveted no one's silver or gold or apparel.*

One major difference between the apostles and current day false teachers is that the latter not only take, but also ask their congregation for money. Paul had asked as well, indeed, but never for himself. He even explicitly states here that he coveted no one's silver or gold and has always worked hard. 
Now some "teachers" such as Joseph Prince have voluntarily stopped receiving a salary, which is a good thing. But the fact that they received salaries of, say, 500 thousand dollars a year is already ludicrous, whether they were making enough on the side or not. That fact is, however, they *did* make more than this amount on their book sales or other activities! Now due to comments perhaps Joseph Prince does not take any salary anymore from his church. One could say that he has taken enough to survive on for the rest of his life, however, he has not returned that salary now that he makes enough off of his books. 
Rick Warren #tags/famouspeople/christian provides the best example here, which I hardly see anywhere among preachers. I suppose his salary was a median or average American salary, say between 15 and 60 thousand a year. In his case I would not even say that 90 thousand dollars would be too much considering the amount of work he did for his church. I do not think it is wrong for one who works 80 hours in a week to receive a salary twice as high. However, he did not. 
After the sales of his book #tags/books *The Purpose Drive Life* made him a millionaire he returned all of his previously received salary and decided to stop receiving any future salary and has given back  *more than* #todo/opzoeken hoeveel precies  
90 percent of his wealth. Even ten percent would still be millions considering the 35 million books he has sold of this book alone, but he has still lived sober, in a fairly big house though, for the last ten years and owning the same car as well. He also has a watch from Walmart, he claims. 
I am not speaking about Rick Warren's theology here, but about his exemplary behavior of dealing with money as the Christian should. 
One final thing, there is another "pastor" (I added the quotes because I do not think that are pastoring their flock very well and hence do not deserve that title) whose name I have forgotten, whose salary was decided by a group that decides the salaries of pastors of megachurches. It is a good thing that one's salary is decided by a group of wise people, perhaps—or even especially—when it is a third party doing that. But the fact alone that it is a group created especially for pastor of *mega churches* indicates that according to them pastors of mega churches should have a different salary than those of smaller churches. 
Indeed, I do think these different types of pastors should have different salaries. Pastors of mega churches should make *less money* not more. The bigger the church, the more help one can expect. I have seen relatively bigger and richer churches where there is almost never a problem with finances of the church or with persons. Targets for donations for renovations on the church building or for missions are reached within days and whenever a (prominent) church member, such as the pastor, is lacking something, there is always someone from church who can provide. I have seen smaller churches with up to fifty people where church members donated their old car or other materials, sometimes even houses, to missionaries in need—would a church with a thousand members, or even 30 thousand members such as #tags/famouspeople/christian Joel Osteen's, not have that even more? Any pastor of a mega church could ask his members for a small gift for food or his children's tuition and I am sure they would be more than content with the amount that would come in. Even Francis Chan #tags/famouspeople/christian, who is another prominent example of exemplary financial behavior, who did not even *ask* for money or tell about his dire financial situation, who had a church of four thousand members (although I do not know how many he had at the time of this example), received an envelope by an anonymous donor with 1000 dollars for his family. So if a pastor does not even ask or tell about his dire situation and his church members really love him and receives the help he needs (of course it is God Who has blessed this congregation and the pastor, let us not forget that)‚ how much then would a pastor get if he *does* ask and *tell* about his needs (aside from asking God in his prayers)? 
This is not the same for a pastor of a small congregation, especially not when its members consist of low-income, lower class citizens. That is why I think a pastor for smaller congregations should make more than one of bigger congregations. Not only for himself, because there are fewer to help him, but also for his members and for the church itself, so that he can give more to them. 

*34 You yourselves know that these hands ministered to my necessities and to those who were with me. 35 ::In all things:: I have shown you that ::by working hard:: in this way we must ::help the weak:: and remember the words of the Lord Jesus, how he himself said, ::‘It is more blessed to give than to receive.’”*::

Paul gives them the extra advise to work hard and to keep giving, for that is better than to ~receive~. 

*36 And when he had said these things, he knelt down and prayed with them all. 37 And there was much weeping on the part of all; they embraced Paul and kissed him, 38 being sorrowful most of all because of the word he had spoken, ::that they would not see his face again::. And they accompanied him to the ship.*

The reason why Paul wanted to see them in person is clear. He wanted to say goodbye because he would not see them again, even though he was nearby Ephesus (Cnidus) on one of his stops during his voyage to Rome, albeit as an indicted person.
It is striking to see that the elders had full confidence in what Paul said and did not (noticeably) doubt Paul's hearing of God. No one doubted whether Paul could have misunderstood and stayed alive. They knew enough about him to know that he would not lie, be dishonest or ask for neither honor or rewards—and most of all, that he was a man of God and could hear the Word of the Holy Spirit spirit clearly. 
It must have been comforting for Paul, in a sense, to know what is coming and perhaps even what the reason is for everything. As he said in Philippians 4:12-13 in the NIV: "*I have found the secret of being content...*" and in the ESV 
> *In any and every circumstance, I have learned the secret of facing plenty and hunger, abundance and need. 13 I can do all things through him who strengthens me.*  
There is a secret to being able to face both plenty and hunger and stay content. One might say that poor children in Africa have never known wealth and therefore do not complain. Indeed, I have heard it say that Africans did not complain about being poor because everyone was. They started the turmoil (e.g. in Liberia) as soon as they saw their neighbors, e.g. white people, having more than they did. 
Paul, however, knew both. He was not suffering from hunger when in Ephesus or in the other cities where he was taken in, but he did suffer both physically and mentally when he was abandoned and imprisoned *by his fellow Jews*. 
Still, Paul knew how to be content. What was that secret? It definitely has to do with putting his hope in God, because he did not exactly know his next steps. For hope is defined in Romans 8:24 as something that is not seen, just like Hebrews 11:1 explains the relationship between faith and hope, where *faith* is the *assurance* of what one hopes for. 
Paul has hope in God's plan, that he will be saved, spiritually, and that God's plan will be fulfilled, and he has assurance of that through his faith, which is not of himself (Ephesians 2:8) but a gift. 
His secret—I think—is not in the fact that he knew what would happen. Some people might think that they would be much more comforted if only they knew the outcome, but more often than not that would have an averse effect. For who would go into war when one knows he is going to die the next day or week? No, I think that Paul knew he was going to be beaten, imprisoned and eventually die, but he could look beyond that. His secret was knowing that the Church would grow, that Christianity would spread and that Jesus Christ will conquer and save His Church—and that everything would start or gain momentum upon his death. #church/material 

Paul knew that *the blood of the martyrs is the seed of the church* as another church father wrote #todo/opzoeken  Tertullian? 
He also knew—perhaps—that God would have given Nero another chance for the horrible persecution he started in 64 AD as well as blaming the great fire in Rome on the Christians. Just like in Pharaoh's case, however— although he started the Jews as slaves many more years before the calling of Moses—Nero was stubborn and unwilling to listen to God upon which God had hardened his heart. This is my speculation and interpretation, but to me it seems too much of a coincidence that Christian persecution started shortly after Paul died (possibly in 64 AD although 67 AD is also suggested, see https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paul_the_Apostle). Even if persecution had started three years prior to Paul's death, his execution may have sped things up, perhaps because of Paul's warning to Nero and the latter's rejection of the Gospel, again, just like the Pharaoh rejected God's second chance *three times*. 

#biblestudy/devotionals/acts

#church/sermons/@andrewyong
#tags/bible/acts #tags/events/pentecost