# Acts 5 (ESV)
**Ananias and Sapphira**
*1 But a man named Ananias, with his wife Sapphira, sold a piece of property, 2 and with his wife's knowledge he kept back for himself some of the proceeds and brought only a part of it and laid it at the apostles' feet. 3 But Peter said, “Ananias, why has Satan filled your heart to lie to the Holy Spirit and to keep back for yourself part of the proceeds of the land?*

There are several noticeable things here, the first of which is that Ananias did this with his wife's knowledge.  The second is that Ananias did not say anything.  
The latter could be for several reasons. He could have been astonished by Peter's knowledge of how he could have known this.  
Apparently he was not present at the time that Peter performed miracles, or he did not believe it, or he did believe it was real, but his pride and need for human approval was bigger than his genuineness towards the Holy Spirit.  
Ananias' conscience was hampered in such a way  such that he could lie and confirm his lie even though he knew that it was wrong. We do not hear of any confirmation, as Ananias seemingly did not even get the chance to speak, but the text clearly states that Ananias had premeditated this.

Another reason why we do not read any words from Ananias could be because Luke did not find anything relevant for him to say—what he said was either an excuse or a lie, we get to fill this in ourselves, but in any case, if it were relevant, if he said anything at all, Luke would have written it down. 

Another thing we can observe from this part is that the first believers were genuine. First of all because Luke writes this, i.e. that there were more than 3000 believers the first day, and second of all, because the Holy Spirit was working so powerfully in them that they must have had the power to distinguish between the nominal and real Christians.  
Of course there arguments that could be brought against this, such as that the gift of distinction #todo/opzoeken/engels was given to Peter but perhaps not to the other Christians, and that this distinction was present because Peter was face to face with Ananias, and not with all the 3000, 5000 and the many more who came to believe afterwards through the other apostles or even through the recently converted Christians. 

*4 While it remained unsold, did it not remain your own? And after it was sold, was it not at your disposal? Why is it that you have contrived this deed in your heart? You have not lied to man but to God.” 5 When Ananias heard these words, he fell down and breathed his last. And great fear came upon all who heard of it. 6 The young men rose and wrapped him up and carried him out and buried him.*

Why would Peter categorize this lie as a lie against God instead of as a normal one? Is it only because it is taking place inside of a "church", i.e. in the midst of the gathering of Christians? No, it is more than that. Actually, every lie committed inside of a church should be categorized as worse than a lie outside of it. Why would one lie? For several reasons—either out of fear or to gain something. I can think of no other reasons. In the world one can fear something and even in church this could happen. Some churches do not provide the safe environment where judging is done lovingly and hence one lies about or hide his addictions. But lying for gain, that is of another and more serious category. Now in the world when one does something like this, it is for his personal gain, and those who see it, will be negatively influenced by it. If others knew this person was a "Christian", or going to church, this sin would be placed in an even higher category, because it would give a bad image to people about what Christians do. 
If this sin was committed inside a church, however, it would be visible to the many people who are actually *looking for God*, who are still young in their faith and to those who are more mature in their faith. Outside of the church would be fewer people looking for God, but unbelievers in a church usually are there because they already had an interest. Now, because of this committed sin, these people might receive an enormous setback. The genuineness and love they expected to see from Christians was all motivated by pride and self-centeredness—is what they think. 
The young believers know that this person is not a real Christian, but the unbelievers do not and might deflect from the right path. The young believers themselves, however, might gain serious trust issues with other Christians, not knowing whether they are real or only nominal ones, like Ananias, and where there is no trust, there is fear, and where there is fear there is no love (cf. 1 Corinthians 13). 
The mature Christians, therefore, need to take action or else even the mature Christians will get a bad image of not being righteous, not enacting justice and consequentially giving God this bad image as well. 
So the answer to our question at the beginning of this piece is that the sin committed in church is worse because there are more unbelievers who were "near conversion" and because it has a huge impact on young believers. The punishment for this sin then must also be worse and visible to others so that they know it is wrong and that God is just and will punish. Agreeing with something requires one to act on it. 
Additionally, when the church is young these kind of punishments should be extra harsh so that these will not occur again. That is why God's punishment of the Israelites was so severe—although He had been very patient already—when they worshipped the golden calves, when they complained about food and when they wanted to return to Egypt. It is also for this reason that He allowed Phinehas to kill an Israelite (Zimri) who took a Midianite girl to be his wife, because this sin had to be rooted out (Numbers 25:7). 

*7 After an interval of about three hours his wife came in, not knowing what had happened. 8 And Peter said to her, “Tell me whether you sold the land for so much.” And she said, “Yes, for so much.” 9 But Peter said to her, “How is it that you have agreed together to test the Spirit of the Lord? Behold, the feet of those who have buried your husband are at the door, and they will carry you out.” 10 Immediately she fell down at his feet and breathed her last. When the young men came in they found her dead, and they carried her out and buried her beside her husband. 11 And great fear came upon the whole church and upon all who heard of these things.*

Both here in verses 3 and 9 Peter says that they lied to (or tested) the Holy Spirit and in verse 4 he says that they lied to God. This is not a contradiction,  but it is another proof that the Holy Spirit *is* God Himself. This argument might not be strong enough for Muslims, who insist that God is One and triune. They could argue that the "Spirit of the Lord", *which*—and not *who*—is the same as the "Holy Spirit", is just like the name says: a spirit *of* the Lord, thus not the Lord Himself. 
They do not understand the concept of "Lord". They think He is like man, who has a spirit and a body. Their argument would be: "If one were to say that he insulted my spirit (or my name), you have insulted me. This does not mean, however, that my spirit (or my name) are separate entities or persons of themselves. No, they are part of my person and part of that which makes me man." This argument is fitting from a human perspective, as this persons mentions in his last statement, which ends with "man", but it is not what defines God. 
The first part of the argument is correct: if we insult a "part" of God, the Son or the Holy Spirit, then we insult God Himself, but the second part cannot be applied to God for He is god and not man. It would be only logical that God does not have—and is not limited to—a body with ten fingers and ten toes, a head and a torso. However, we have been created in His image and so we are a "bit" alike, though not in our appearance. 
In our *character* we have been created with the same traits of anger, patience, jealousy etc. only we cannot control these and we have different levels and intensities of these traits at the wrong moments. The same goes for our *personalities* (see the DISC-course or enneagrams for an elaborate definition and explanation on what personalities are) where we have traits of dominance and in- and extroversion. 
In our *composition* as well we are made of body, soul and mind (while some say "body, soul and spirit" where the soul and the mind are interchangeable). Now God does not have a body for one. 
#todo  vertalen
#todo/nogaftemaken onze ziel is eigenlijk de bestuurder (ofwel onze geest), maar onze gedachten willen niet altijd luisteren. Onze ziel is degene die contact kan maken met God. Onze mind is slechts een computer, zoals evolutionisten zeggen, het is slechts een product van nature and nurture. Het reageert zoals het is geleerd. Maar dat is dus niet helemaal waar, omdat er dus een operator zit achter deze computer. 
Ons verstand luistert ook niet altijd naar ons. We weten dat we positief moeten denken, we willen het ook, maar toch denken we het niet en zijn we aan het doemdenken, depressief etc. Zelfs bij verslaafde mensen zie je dat ze het eigenlijk niet willen, maar toch weer wel willen. Hoe kan dat? Dat is omdat er twee "personen" zijn die iets willen. Eén persoon kan geen twee dingen willen (even kijken of dit klopt als een man twee vrouwen wil hebben). 
Dat is omdat ons verstand bijna een persoon op zichzelf is, en ons lichaam ook. Kijk maar naar wat we doen als we honger hebben. Hij kan ook hard roepen en anders sturen met zijn hormonen. Maar toch kan hij dat niet helemaal doen onafhankelijk van het verstand, ofwel de hersenen. De hersenen sturen het lichaam aan, maar het lichaam op zijn beurt beïnvloedt weer de hersenen met de stofjes. 
Bij God is alles beter. Daar zijn het niet "bijna" lichamen, maar echte lichamen, en die hun werk doen, perfect met elkaar samenwerken en altijd gehoorzaam zijn naar de leider. 

Both Ananias and Sapphira **breathed** their **last**, a euphemism for dying, but with regards to the Holy Spirit, who was breathed into Adam, and Scripture, which is God-breathed (cf. 2 Timothy 3:16) it seems like a silent reference indicated that both of them lost the Holy Spirit, not because it is possible to lose one's salvation—although that is one interpretation—but rather that they were never saved to begin with. 

**Many Signs and Wonders Done**
*12 Now many signs and wonders were regularly done among the people by the hands of the apostles. And they were all together in ~Solomon's Portico~.*

Once again they were at Solomon's Portico where Jesus had been as well when teaching the Law. #todo/opzoeken reference Would this have any significance? First of all, it is indicative of the apostles' following Jesus footsteps. But why did Jesus teach at that location? Perhaps it is because it was an entrance to the proselytes from the Women's Court. Jesus is the bridge between heaven and Earth and also between the Jews and gentiles. He is also the One Who gives women and foreigners rights and protection. Perhaps Jesus chose that location as a symbol. 

*13 None of the rest dared join them, but the people held them in high esteem.*

What is furthermore noticeable is that the "rest" of the Jews did not join them. #biblestudy/questions Who is the rest? *MacSBNnkjv* writes that this refers to the unbelieving Jews. From the context seen these were most likely Jews, because they were in the temple. It is not that all unbelievers were not willing to join the apostles, because we know that there were thousands that did, as we also read in the next verse. #todo/nogaftemaken  erg vreemde zinsopbouw. 

*14 And more than ever believers were added to the Lord, multitudes of both men and women, 15 so that they even carried out the sick into the streets and laid them on cots and mats, that as Peter came by at least his shadow might fall on some of them. 16 The people also gathered from the towns around Jerusalem, bringing the sick and those afflicted with unclean spirits, and they were all healed.*

How is it possible for people to be afflicted with unclean spirit? The answer is that they cannot, if they are children of the One true God. There can be no other explanation than that they, or someone near them, involved himself with those unclean spirits and idols. 
Before, but during and after Jesus' coming, there has always been idolatry within the Jewish religion and its sects. David Pawson #church/sermons/@davidpawson mentioned that after 400 years of silence the Israelites were still sinning, but at least they were not following pagan gods anymore. However, this is only partially true. The gods they followed were not pagan, but they were of another character. Mammon was the god of money, but even without Mammon, it is still possible to have money as one's god (cf. God's warnings in the Book of Malachi #todo/opzoeken  reference). The Pharisees and Sadducees wanted power and attention or awe, which is an idol as well (cf. v.17). Furthermore, esotericism within the Jewish community, through e.g. Kabbalah, arose around the 12th century AD, but surely the devil has been active even before that. 
Even if the Israelites were not involved in spiritism (which should be distinguished from spiritualism), they were not involved with God and had set their hearts on evil things (cf. 1 Corinthians 10:6 (NIV)) which *allowed* the Satan to afflict them (cf. James 1:14). 

**The Apostles Arrested and Freed**
*17 But the high priest rose up, and all who were with him (that is, the party of the Sadducees), and filled with jealousy 18 they arrested the apostles and put them in the public prison. 19 But during the night an angel of the Lord opened the prison doors and brought them out, and said, 20 “Go and stand in the temple and speak to the people all the words of this Life.” 21 And when they heard this, they entered the temple at daybreak and began to teach.*

The **angel of the Lord** (I am not sure if this is the same angel that is mentioned in other places in the Bible by the same name) set the apostles free, this time to preach in the temple. The other time this happened to Peter the angel did not command him to preach, but he was led away (Acts 12:6ff) but told the ones about this who were praying. When it happened to Paul and Silas (Acts 16:16ff), Paul told the jailor about this so that he converted that same night. 
When the Lord does such a thing, he has a purpose with the one He sets free, but this could be different for everyone. It could be to convert some, to encourage others who already believe, or to continue preaching to those who do not believe and who might still not believe. 

*Now when the high priest came, and those who were with him, they called together the council, all the senate of the people of Israel, and sent to the prison to have them brought. 22 But when the officers came, they did not find them in the prison, so they returned and reported, 23 “We found the prison securely locked and the guards standing at the doors, but when we opened them we found no one inside.” 24 Now when the captain of the temple and the chief priests heard these words, they were greatly ::perplexed:: about them, wondering what this would come to.*

The chief priests were **wondering what this would come to**, but what happened after that? In v.27 they immediately questioned them again instead of asking them how it could be that they were not in prison? 
If only they had asked and if the apostles had told about the angel of the Lord and the series of events that were #todo/opzoeken/engels niet weerlegbaar, perhaps they might have gained more respect for God through the miracle they had seen. But alas, they returned to their old selves, wishing for what *they* wanted. 
Too often this is what happens with people who say they have become Christians but then lose their "faith". Their eyes are not fixed on Jesus, but on what Jesus can do for *them*. They see what Jesus does for them, even before they accepted Him, and they are willing to sacrifice a little, which is a few hours in church and for fellowship, and perhaps a few hours more for music practise or other voluntary work for church, although most of it is done because of the friendships they acquire, something *they* needed as well. They do not realize that Jesus has already given them enough, *more* than enough that we should serve Him all of our lives. Instead, they want to see what Jesus can give them *aside* from eternal life, so that they may have an abundant life according to their own definition. 
 
*25 And someone came and told them, “Look! The men whom you put in prison are standing in the temple and teaching the people.” 26 Then the captain with the officers went and brought them, but not by force, for they were afraid of being stoned by the people.*

The captain *and* his **officers were afraid of being stoned by the people**. It does not matter what miracles happened, such as in v.24, and how perplexed they. Even the great number of people who witnessed the miracles could testify of the miracles of God through Peter, through the hundreds if not thousands of people who were healed (v.16) whom the temple captain must have known if the sick were often brought to the temple for healing. But that captain and his officers' hearts were hardened and no miracle of God could soften it. 

*27 And when they had brought them, they set them before the council. And the high priest questioned them, 28 saying, “We strictly charged you not to teach in this name, yet here you have filled Jerusalem with your teaching, and you intend to bring this man's blood upon us.”* 

Even though the chief priests and others, the guards as well, had encountered this miracle of Peter's and the other apostles' escape, they still did not accept that this was God's doing. They did not even inquire of the way this had happened, because their hearts were so hardened that they were **perplexed** but not *amazed* about this wonder of God. 
#todo/opzoeken  difference between enquire and inquire
It seems like even their minds were hardened, because they claimed the apostles *intended* "**to bring this man's blood upon**" them, while it is not an intent, but a clear statement which the council should have remember, unless the council had changed which did not happen for Annas was still High Priest (Acts 4:6), and even if it did, the timespan was only a few months between Jesus' death and Acts 5. The former council would have done some handover or transition of information, and it would be very improbable if the Person of Jesus of Nazareth would not have been mentioned as the source of current events concerning the rise of Christianity. Also, receiving the death penalty by crucifixion by the Romans for blasphemy of one's own god, i.e. not the Roman ones, was a rare event, if it happened at all. 

*29 But Peter and the apostles answered, “We must obey God rather than men. 30 The God of our fathers raised Jesus, whom you killed by hanging him on a tree. 31 God exalted him at his right hand as Leader and Savior, to give repentance to Israel and forgiveness of sins. 32 And we are witnesses to these things, and so is the Holy Spirit, whom God has given to those who obey him.”*
*33 When they heard this, they were enraged and wanted to kill them.*

Why would the Sadducees be enraged because of what Peter and the apostles said? We have previously seen that the Sadducees were **greatly annoyed** because of the apostles' theology of the rising of the dead in Acts 4:2, and in verse 17 that they were **jealous**—or perhaps this only showed their true motivation for being annoyed—but what we see in this part are two statements, assuming that they were not enraged because of the facts mentioned in v.32, i.e. that they **are witnesses**, that the Holy Spirit is a witness and that the **Holy Spirit** has been **given to those who obey Him**: (1) the Jews (among which the High Priest and his party, the Sadducees) crucified Jesus (v.30) and (2) Jesus is **exalted** to God's **right hand** and will forgive the people's sins (v.31).

The first statement is not new. As a matter of fact it is mentioned in Acts that Peter has talked about this three times already before this event (during Pentecost, after the healing of the lame beggar in Solomon's Portico, before the council on the day after), while in reality this must have been many more times.  
I can hardly imagine them being angry because of this statement—even though they claimed their innocence in verse 28—for the Sadducees and the priests were much aware of their past actions in crucifying Christ and the beating during night and morning before that. 
The second statement is not new per se  but it is the same reason for which one of the priests tore his clothes and called out blasphemy against Jesus, when He claimed to be God Himself. As a matter of fact it is this reason that most, if not all, apologists use for the crucifixion of Jesus. They wanted Jesus dead because of blasphemy of claiming to be God Himself. Apologists use this, because atheists claim that Jesus never claimed this Himself and that his disciples—or the generations after them—were the ones to do so. 
So could it be the second part of the second statement that angered them, namely that Jesus would forgive them? This, to me, seems the most plausible explanation for their anger. How could anyone say that they, the priests and the strictly religious Sadducees, needed to be forgiven? To them that in itself seemed to be blasphemous, which would mean they had elevated themselves to the position of God. 

*34 But a Pharisee in the council named ~Gamaliel~, a teacher of the law held in honor by all the people, stood up and gave orders to put the men ::outside:: for a little while.*

Paul's own teacher, **Gamaliel**, showed his wisdom and it is seen where Paul has got his deductive reasoning from, aside from the wisdom imparted by the Holy Spirit. Paul, however, was not present here nor was he a Christian yet, if this part is written chronologically, and if he were present, he probably would not have agreed with Gamaliel, for he was less patient to await the consequences of the actions of Christians, but let his zeal for the Law of the Lord reign over him.

It is also remarkable that the men were **outside** and the Luke still obtained a record of this. Luke perhaps got this information from Paul who obtained this from Gamaliel, or perhaps there were people in the council who were more positive to this message #todo/opzoeken  reference to discussen where there is a strife between the Pharisees  and the Sadducees. 

*35 And he said to them, “Men of Israel, take care what you are about to do with these men. 36 For before these days Theudas rose up, claiming to be somebody, and a number of men, about four hundred, joined him. He was killed, and all who followed him were dispersed and came to nothing. 37 After him ::Judas the Galilean:: rose up in the days of the census and drew away some of the people after him. He too perished, and all who followed him were scattered.*

#todo/opzoeken  I am sure this person's record can be found in history, which would be another confirmation of the Bible's historicity and historical veracity. 

*38 So in the present case I tell you, keep away from these men and let them alone, for if this plan or this undertaking is of man, it will fail; 39 but if it is of God, you will not be able to overthrow them. You might even be found opposing God!” So they took his advice, 40 and when they had called in the apostles, they ::beat:: them and charged them not to speak in the name of Jesus, and let them go.*

In fact, they did not take his advice, for they beat them and later on allowed and spurred on Paul to persecute the Christians, even in places outside of Israel. If the apostles were **of God**, they were already **opposing God** right now by the beating of these men and their command **not to speak in the name of Jesus**. 
I am not sure what happened of Gamaliel, but it seems that he would have heard of his student Paul's persecution and subsequent conversion to Christianity. If Gamaliel really was full of wisdom as he had shown here, and open to searching God, at least a few questions would have raised in his mind, wondering how this could have happened and whether Jesus was actually God. 
Unfortunately we know nothing else of Gamaliel after this period. #todo/opzoeken 

*41 Then they left the presence of the council, rejoicing that they were counted ~worthy to suffer~ ::dishonor:: for the name. 42 And every day, in the temple and from house to house, they did not cease teaching and preaching that the Christ is Jesus.*

Yesterday I had a discussion with my wife about a certain attitude and behavior among church members that implied ingratitude and disrespect. I was listening patiently to what she was telling me, trying to comfort her and ease her pain, but then she turned to me in her #todo/opzoeken/engels rede and implied that I was no better, showing ingratitude for the efforts she had done to make me happy. All of a sudden I was in a position where I needed to defend myself, because I was the one being attacked now. After all this effort *I* had done to listen to her patiently, this is what I get in return?, I thought. 
Observing the attitude of the apostles, however, I see that I am not worthy of being called a Christian, which means "little Christ", for I am not even near *little*, but far less than that. The apostles suffered, physically and were treated unrighteously, for they had done no wrong. They were dishonored so that not only the priests, but also all of town saw they were arrested, albeit **not by force**, this was still a dishonorable thing to happen. 

Note that the disciples were **worthy to suffer**. This is an honor meant for everyone. It is not for the strong, who can manage the suffering, but it is for those who are willing to deny themselves. For if anyone is not willing to suffer in small matters, as I am, he is not worthy to suffer in great matters (cf. Luke 16:10). 


#biblestudy/devotionals/acts #tags/events/pentecost
