# Acts 17 (ESV)
***Paul and Silas in Thessalonica*** 
*1 Now when they had passed through Amphipolis and Apollonia, they came to Thessalonica, where there was a synagogue of the Jews. 2 And Paul went in, as was his custom, and on three Sabbath days he reasoned with them from the Scriptures,*

This part could mean that it was Paul's custom to go into the synagogues in general or that he did this regularly on Sabbath days. I would imagine that even not on Sabbath days there would be people in the synagogue with whom Paul could connect and build relations so that on the Sabbath he would have the stage. 
Paul could have introduced himself as a student of Gamaliel, from Jerusalem, so that the Jews there would receive him well and give him time to read and explain the Word to them, just like the people in Nazareth let Jesus speak. 
Paul's background could be used to his advantage to enter these circles. Even now in Reformed Churches, and in still in the Catholic Church, it is required to have a degree in Theology before one is allowed to teach or speak. But for speaking on the market place or in Solomon's Portico God made no distinction in academic credits and often used unschooled men like Peter. 
Note that even if Paul used his credentials to enter the synagogues and speak there, which we do not know for sure, it was only to enter it. Paul himself said he does not boast in all of his merits and background, but only in his weaknesses and of Christ. 

*3 explaining and proving that it was necessary for the Christ to suffer and to rise from the dead, and saying, “This Jesus, whom I proclaim to you, is the Christ.” 4 And some of them were persuaded and joined Paul and Silas, as did a great many of the devout Greeks and not a few of the leading women.* 

We zien dat het de godvrezende Grieken en *vooraanstaande* vrouwen zijn die tot geloof kwamen, misschien waren er wel meer mensen die tot geloof kwamen, zoals Joden, maar die zijn niet genoemd. Misschien is dat omdat er daarvan te weinig waren of het is om een andere reden niet noemenswaardig. 
Je zou verwachten dat het niet noemenswaardig is dat Joden tot geloof komen omdat het hun geloof is en omdat het voor hen ook het meest logisch zou zijn. De Joden geloofden namelijk al niet zomaar in een god, maar in Yahweh Zelf en in alle andere dingen die Paulus zei. Het enige wat ze nog meer moesten geloven, was dat Yahweh Zichzelf altijd al geopenbaard had via de Heilige Geest en via Zijn Woord (de Bijbel, of Tora, TeNaCH of Ha Mikra) en dat de Vader, de Heilige Geest en Zijn Woord één zijn. Dat laatste konden ze wel geloven, maar ze moesten ook geloven dat het drie aparte Personen waren. Als laatste moesten ze ook geloven dat het Woord gepersonificeerd was in Jezus Christus Zelf. 
Hoe dan ook, ik zou zeggen dat het voor een Jood minder stappen was om te geloven in deze Jezus dan voor een Griek, omdat een Griek überhaupt God nog niet kende en moest geloven in het hele verhaal van de schepping en van Adam en Eva tot en met nu. 

Dat maakt het dus extra noemenswaardig dat de Grieken geloofden. Dat de vrouwen geloofden is enerzijds gezien ook noemenswaardig. Het gaat hier namelijk om het woord "vooraanstaand". #todo/translate 

*5 But the Jews were jealous, and taking some wicked men of the rabble, they formed a mob, set the city in an uproar, and attacked the house of Jason, seeking to bring them out to the crowd.*

It seems to be a standard practice of the Jews that when they cannot win by arguments, they will try to convince by the masses. When that does not work—or in this case they did not even try, but went to it immediately—they start using physical violence. How often have we not seen this? In the New Testament up until now we have seen this when they tried to stone Jesus in Nazareth—although it was not specifically mentioned they stirred up a mob or that this mob consisted of men from the rabble—and ultimately before His death. The exclamation before Pilate when the people had to choose between Barrabas and Jesus was probably stirred up as well, for it could not have been that all hated Jesus so much that he should die. 
I must have skipped so many other situations where the Jews had done the same, but in Acts we already see it in Iconium and then in the cities thereafter. 
Is this not the same as the Left wing is doing? Do they not have any other tactic. It is striking to see that 2000 years later Saul Alinsky, a Jew again, used the same tactic to create labor unions and force their demands on companies. His legacy lives on in movements such as *Black Lives Matter* which has infiltrated even Western Europe and is in fact attacking some of the basic principles of Western society which are based on Christianity, such as equality with respect to race and ethnicity, the right to live and free speech, which this movement most certainly does not respect, seeing that it also supports Planned Parenthood and the like. #tags/politics 

*6 And when they could not find them, they dragged Jason and some of the brothers before the city authorities, shouting, “These men who have turned the world upside down have come here also, 7 and Jason has received them, and they are all acting against the decrees of Caesar, saying that there is another king, Jesus.”* 

Ultimately, when people cannot find anyone to blame, they will appoint someone who is guilty, even if it is someone from their own. During the events of #tags/historic events/metoo# the *Me Too* movement the Left would have loved going after the Republicans, but unfortunately most of the sexual perpetrators were people who had donated big amounts of money to the Left. In fact, they were part of the Left wing, but were now denounced, betrayed by their own "friends" or partners. 
I do not remember if this happened, but I can imagine Hillary Clinton denouncing Jeffrey Epstein, while a few weeks ago she was still having dinner with him with her husband. Some men, like Matt Damon and Ben Affleck, #tags/famouspeople still stood by their friend Harvey Weinstein and never publicly and clearly denounced his actions, or even said they knew anything about it. 
Lastly, if all of that does not work, they have to go to the god of the people. In this case it was Caesar, i.e. the Roman Emperor Claudius #todo/opzoeken , whom Pontius Pilate was afraid of and the city authorities as well. In these days it is the term Social Justice. People have become so afraid of being called anything outside of the range of social justice, such as bigots, homophobes or even Islamophobes, because they would put them out of the group. Their god is to belong to the group. The Left has created this group and once anyone deviates from it, they get labelled immediately. No one wants to get that label and so they work hard and accept things even unacceptable to their own moral standards in order to become part of the socially just group, also so that they feel like they are just and do good. 
The only groups who do not care about being socially just are Republicans, Christians and nonchalant or extremist groups. Rednecks for example do not carry and live out in the country and do their own thing, while Right Extremism has its own philosophy which goes against that of the Left. So Republicans and Christians—in most cases people are both and in the case where Christians are Democrats, one has consider whether this person actually is a newborn Christian—are grouped together by the Left as being extremists, also called the *Alt-Right* #tags/politics/alt-right or all of the above, and on top of that also being sexist and old-fashioned, climate change deniers and *Flat Earth* conspiracists. 

*8 And the people and the city authorities were disturbed when they heard these things. 9 And when they had taken money as security from Jason and the rest, they let them go.* 

***Paul and Silas in Berea*** 
*10 The brothers immediately sent Paul and Silas away by night to Berea, and when they arrived they went into the Jewish synagogue. 11 Now these Jews were more noble than those in Thessalonica; they received the word with all eagerness, examining the Scriptures daily to see if these things were so.*

This famous verse about the Bereans, who still have a good reputation among Christians, if the city and its people still exist and are known as such #todo/opzoeken tells us more about the definition of the word *noble*. Whereas we would think of a gentleman or someone of royal blood, having learned horse-riding and the etiquettes of royalties, this verse tells us more about the inner being of actual noble people, which is to receive a word with eagerness and to examine it in order to find the truth. 
Are those who accept the truth as children then not noble? Both Christian and Islamic children accept the word as given by their parents. Indeed, children cannot said to be noble, for they merely accepted it without examination. #tags/religion/islam Could Maria, Lazarus' sister, be called noble then? She received the Word of Jesus with great eagerness, but we do not know if she examined the Scriptures. 
What is also very noble is the fact that the Greek were willing to listen to Paul, who was a high standing Jew, but also could have seemed an apostate. The Bereans were willing to move aside their prejudice and research what Paul said about the Word and what the Word said about these things themselves.

*12 Many of them therefore believed, with not a few Greek women of high standing as well as men. 13 But when the Jews from Thessalonica learned that the word of God was proclaimed by Paul at Berea also, they came there too, agitating and stirring up the crowds.*

Why would the Jews come all the way from Thessalonica to drive Paul away. Was it not enough that Paul had left their city? I assume the Thessalonicans were not actively proselytizing in that area and that Paul invaded their area. This was not a matter of competition nor but a personal matter. They hated Paul and his message and therefore followed him to wherever he went just so that his mission would be disrupted. 
Strangely, in my sight, God did not allow Paul to defend himself against the Thessalonicans for the good of the Bereans. What I mean, is not that God let Paul flee instead of defend himself "for the good of the Bereans", but why God did not let Paul defend God's message, so that the Bereans would have heard the counterarguments from Paul against the lies the Thessalonicans were probably telling about him. Perhaps God here too wanted to filter out those Bereans for Himself who were so noble that they would not be prejudiced and would look for noble characteristics themselves. So if any of these Bereans fell for the tricks of the Thessalonicans, they were not even worthy of being called noble or of being part of His kingdom. 

**Example.** I myself fell into this trap once, when my "friend" teased me in front of his friends, for having a cheaper insurance which only covered some things, and perhaps would not even cover his lamp which I had broken, unlike theirs which covered much more. 
I tried defending myself, not only to my friends, but also to my friend's friends, whom I did not even know, and explaining how my insurance was a real one, but it was part of a package of my bank which included my bank account. 
My friend even told me: "Why are you explaining yourself to them? As if they care about what kind of insurance you have."
Looking in hindsight, I did not need to defend myself. If these "friends" or "friend's friends" were going to laugh at me for having a cheaper insurance, they would not even be worthy of being my friends. I should have let them laugh and find out who was honorable. 
In facts, it was my own insecurity which made me defend myself, even to those whom I did not know. 

Why would the Jews from Thessalonica stir up the Berean area? Perhaps they were insecure about their faith as well. They thought of the Jewish faith getting lost, just like oriental parents are afraid when their children marry with other ethnicities, because the oriental culture will eventually disappear. 
On one hand the Jews were rightly so. The Jewish culture did disappear and "evolved" if you will into Christianity—although the original Judaism, without the Talmud, is the same as Christianity but missing a few revelations. Oriental parents as well are rightly so to think that their culture will disappear, just like Islamic parents are afraid of their culture and conservativeness disappearing by the influence of the West—because all of these things actually happened. #tags/religion/islam
On the other hand, though, the Jews should have had more faith in God. God Himself would never let the truth be blemished. Even until today, though there are many Christian-like religions, it is still clear what actual Christianity is and even though the numbers of newborn Christians who actually and sincerely follow the path of Jesus Christ seem small, Christians still know God is in control and leading this world, because all of the events that are happening are foretold by Him, such as the behavior of people in Romans and specific events in Revelations.
The Jews knew from history that the Babylonian, Persian and Greek civilizations and religions were put to death consecutively by one another, and so, perhaps, they were afraid that this would happen to their religion as well. The fact alone that Judaism remained even though worldly kingdoms arose and fell should already tell them that Judaism is different. 

So to summarize, the Jews were insecure due to a lack of faith in God and they were blind in seeing the power of God and historical events (how God preserved the Jews and their religion) and in seeing the truth (how God revealed Himself through Christianity and that Christian is the same as Judaism).

As a second point: what is the seriousness of people believing in Christianity instead of Judaism, and what would be the impact on Judaism in Thessalonica? It is not as if we are talking about a presidential election among states. In such a situation it would make sense to follow the Republicans in order to disrupt their campaign so that that state would also vote Democrat, to increase the odds of their presidential candidate of choice being elected, because the president would be ruling *all* states, including theirs. But in this case there was no such election going on and the Jews were only a minority in Macedonia. What would it matter if the few Jewish people of Berea would become Christian and leave the faith. Were the Jews in Thessalonica so concerned about apostasy? I have never heard of that. I know of apostasy rules in Islam where Muhammad specifically commands Muslims to do all they can to prevent potential apostates from leaving Islam and bring them back by all means, and punish them by death when this does not work. #tags/religion/islam But in the case of Jews I have never read any rules about ::apostates:: or I do not remember them, at least not in the Old Testament. #todo/opzoeken apostasy in the Old Testament. The New Testament has Paul writing a few lines about those who have tasted the glory of the Holy Spirit before and that those who have rejected God can never be part of His kingdom again, but the Old Testament never punishes a person for leaving Judaism except during the Exodus when the people wanted to leave the camp, after having worshipped the two golden calves. But it was for a different reason that God killed the apostates, namely because they were giving a bad example and God had to *set* the example that worshipping other gods would lead to death. At least this much was needed during the primary phase of the Israelites. Later on, whenever one left the religion, you can even say this of David's children for these were definitely not true Israelites for raping their sister and seeking to murder their father for the throne, God did not punish them for leaving the religion nor instituted a rule for apostasy. 

The current political situation in America is actually a good example and analogy of chasing one's enemies or competitors across cities. Sarah Huckabee Sanders, former Press Secretary of the United States, once went with her husband and her parents in-law to a restaurant and was not allowed to stay there by the restaurant's manager, because of her political affiliations with the Republican Party. She respectfully left, but her parents in-law went to the restaurant across the street. The manager of the restaurant then gathered a crowd—just like the Jews in Thessalonica did—and shouted on the outside of that restaurant for them to be rejected there as well. 
Now for what reason did they do this? This had nothing to do with the election. It would not gain any votes for the Democratic Party, rather it would only show the people their real nature of violence and intolerance and their inability to separate a different view of politics with being respectful to others. The reason they did this was because of their (ungrounded) hatred for President Trump and the Republican Party. I have put "ungrounded" between parentheses because the president had done nothing wrong to the Democrats. If it was grounded by anything, it was by indoctrination with lies about Republicans being homophobic, against women rights (by being pro-life), xenophobic (and Islamophobic by pushing for border control), endangering the streets and promoting violence and mass shootings (by being for the Second Amendment #tags/politics/amendments/second and being against further gun control), etc. Now there is a case to be made for all of these things, for indeed it is not good if one is pro any of the above things. The question is not why Democrats think so badly of Republicans. That answer is clear and is because of the media's lies about Republics and their views on the above subjects. The media has lied about the homophobia of Christians, while it was Christians who protected the homosexual people during and after the Second World War #tags/historic events/wwii# which even Milo Yiannopoulos #tags/famouspeople acknowledges and uses as an argument *for* Christians. The media has also lied about abortion and willingly neglects all cases of women who died from abortions and the depressions women have after aborting their baby.
If that has not been enough they also lie about immigrants by neglecting the facts and statistics of criminality by immigrants and how pitiful the immigrants are in their own country and how they are treated by the American customs. 
So it is clear why the people, who listen to the media, have such a bad image of Republicans. The question, however is, first of all, why Democrats even care about all of these issues while they were so much against it merely decades ago, and second of all #todo/nogaftemaken 

...

So concluding, 
1. they got this idea from the media that these things were important 
2. they were (and are still) fed with lies from the media that the Right does not care about these things

*14 Then the brothers immediately sent Paul off on his way to the sea, but Silas and Timothy remained there. 15 Those who conducted Paul brought him as far as Athens, and after receiving a command for Silas and Timothy to come to him as soon as possible, they departed.* 

***Paul in Athens*** 
*16 Now while Paul was waiting for them at Athens, his spirit was provoked within him as he saw that the city was full of idols.*

The fact that Paul saw the idols, and then saw that it was full of idols already is very striking compared to the Christians in these days who cannot even distinguish sorcery from a book like Harry Potter. Of course they know it is sorcery and witchcraft, and of course they know that the Bible says that these things are forbidden, but they think these are different things. In which ways are they actually different? In the Bible divination was done to hear what the gods had to say, and acts of of necromancy were performed to talk with the dead. Harry Potter did not do such things, or did he? I think he did do quite *similar* things. Now of course Voldemort is the bad guy, no one questions that, but the tricks Harry Potter uses are far from innocent, biblically seen. 
Where is the moral of the story if witchcraft needs to attacked with witchcraft? 
But this is merely one example of idolatry. What about worship of the Mammon, of wealth and materials, or of pop and sports stars? Now that is different, they would again contend, for they are not actually kneeling and praying for them, nor expecting any goodwill from them. Now that may be true, but that is not the definition of idolatry. The definition in fact is anything that is put above God. Does any of these *fans*—or should I say *worshippers*? —spend more time with God than with their idol? Do they know the Bible better than the facts about their idol's achievements, have they memorized more key verses from the Bible than the songs and lyrics and matches of their idols? Do they know more about the Christian heroes in history who died for Christ than their idol's new fling? In anything they do it shows they have put their idol above God and His people. 

*17 So he reasoned in the synagogue with the Jews and the devout persons, and in the marketplace every day with those who happened to be there.*

Aside from this, we see he did this every day. Now I do not know if this included the Sabbath. Paul would have taken rest in between, of course, or spent the remainder of his time on making tents for sale and perhaps spreading the Gospel at the same time. The main thing is, used every day an an opportunity to spread the Gospel, not to make a living, but because it was his life's *purpose*. 
How nice it is to have a purpose for which one would live and strive, without  even any guarantee of an income. How good it is of God to be able to do so without worrying about our safety, for He will take care of us. There are have been many missionaries and many of whom failed to complete their mission due to hardened hearts on the field or who died during their mission by persecution, but I have yet to hear of one who died because of hunger or cold because the Lord did not protect him. 
There are examples, such as Gladys Aylward #tags/famouspeople/christian/missionaries , who has had to walk such long distances with so many children in China, simply to find refuge in a city. Eventually she got a pneumonia from which she did recover, but stayed in a bad physical condition for the rest of her life due to the severity of her illness during this journey. 
Something similar happened to Adoniram Judson's #tags/famouspeople/christian/missionaries wife #todo/opzoeken . Still no missionary died in vain or *simply* for lack of food because he could not find work, but always for a greater purpose. If one were to die of food, it would be something like in prison, where one was withheld from food by the anti-Christian regime, but that would fall under the category of persecution. 

There were three types of persons Paul was reasoning with. The Jews, because they were God's children, whether they were devout and willing or not; the devout persons, because most likely they were seeking and willing to listen to the truth; and those who *happened* to be there, because God does not work with coincidences and everyone is somewhere at any given time because God put him at that place at that time. 
This is a good way of evangelizing when on the streets or at work with those around you. There are always some people who coincidentally pass by, those who are interested in hearing it and Jewish people.
Unfortunately I have missed many of the chances at my work, in all of my career, because I was not focused on the Gospel and too afraid to share it
bluntly with others. I have actually known three Jewish people, one who was half Jewish and the other a quarter, and the third one, half Jewish, but whose mother was a proselyte who converted to Judaism, whom I should have told the Gospel. All three completely did not know God or their roots. 
Aside from that, I have had many colleagues, some of whom I have told I was Christian, but never invited to come to my church and only explained about or defended aspects of our religion, instead of telling about God's story with the world. 
May God forgive me for being such a coward of not admitting to others everything He has done for me, just because of my shame to be seen as strange. It was not even because I did not want to push others away from religion, but merely because I wanted to be accepted. 
That is why I admire people who preach on the streets so much, because of their boldness and because they are filled with the Holy Spirit. This boldness and filling is available to any child of God who dares to take that step for Him. 

*18 Some of the Epicurean and Stoic philosophers also conversed with him. And some said, “What does this babbler wish to say?” Others said, “He seems to be a preacher of foreign divinities”—because he was preaching Jesus and the resurrection. 19 And they took him and brought him to the Areopagus, saying, “May we know what this new teaching is that you are presenting? 20 For you bring some strange things to our ears. We wish to know therefore what these things mean.”*

The fact that they called Paul a *babbler*, which according to *MacSBNnkjv* is someone who picks pieces of prevailing philosophies, means that Paul was saying certain things they already knew. Now Paul was preaching Jesus and the resurrection, which was the foreign part, because the Greek would not have known about an incarnation of a deity and the resurrection of it. The Epicurean and Stoics on the other hand were familiar with the way of living of Judeo-Christian people, for example what Paul mentions about being content in Philippians 4:11, for their philosophies were all about being content and avoiding or not having pain. In the same way many religions share—*superficially*, for in their core they are completely different (see the explanation about this by Ravi Zacharias, perhaps in his book #tags/books ...Christian ...?? #todo/opzoeken #todo/nogaftemaken misschien uitleggen waarom de kern tussen de verschillende geloven anders is en dat religies alleen aan de oppervlakte op elkaar lijken)—some traits such as being good to one's neighbor and giving to the poor. 
Now there is an argument not so frequently used by atheists yet still serious enough that Josh and Sean McDowell included this in their apologetic book #tags/books *Evidence that Demands a Verdict*. #tags/apologetics It is the topic of ancient myths similar to Biblical narratives. Take for example the Egyptian *Horus* (see Part 2, Chapter 11, page 468) of whom not only his traits and actions, but also that of those around him share striking similarities with Jesus, Lazarus and John the Baptist. 
Though that may be a fact, the Greek here still admitted they did not understand what Paul was saying, it was still *strange* and they did not know *what it meant*. Even if the Egyptians had these tales of Horus being born from a virgin mother, they did not know *why* he had to be born of a virgin, why this guy had to be beheaded like John the Baptist etc. 
By the way, the Bible was earlier in predicting this #todo/opzoeken door wie? Isaiah?
All these bits of Egyptian, Babylonian or whatever mythology does not make any sense, just like that of the Greek which only tells about the dramatic lives of the gods and heroes, but not of what this has to do with us. #todo/nogaftemaken 
It is the Gospel, and only the Gospel—not even the Old Testament could do it—that makes the picture complete, of why there was a creation to literally begin with, what the prophecies and ceremonies mean and pointed to and what will happen in the end-times and what role Jesus plays in it. 

*21 Now all the Athenians and the foreigners who lived there would spend their time in nothing except telling or hearing something new.* 

***Paul Addresses the Areopagus*** 
*22 So Paul, standing in the midst of the Areopagus, said: “Men of Athens, I perceive that in every way you are very religious.*

I am not sure if Paul means this as a compliment or as an observation meaning that they are very aware of each god deserving due respect. It forms a good introduction to gain the interest of the people around him, as he proceeds in explaining that which they do not know, speaking of a God Who is greater than theirs and using ratio and rhetoric to prove his point—all three being methods or habits the Greek would have appreciated. Verse 21 speaks of their interest in new things; Luke's theme of his gospel was to show what a perfect man is, as philosophers always strive for the best; and rhetoric is a thing of all cultures, but perhaps most evident and appreciated within the Greek and Roman ones. 
It is clear that Paul was very suited for this task, aside from the Greek language and literature he knew very well as shown in later verses. 

*23 For as I passed along and observed the objects of your worship, I found also an altar with this inscription: To the unknown god.’ What therefore you worship as unknown, this I proclaim to you. 24 The God who made the world and everything in it, being Lord of heaven and earth, does not live in temples made by man, 25 nor is he served by human hands, as though he needed anything, since he himself gives to all mankind life and breath and everything.*

Our God, Yahweh, made the world and *everything* in it. In Greek mythology—which probably (so I have heard #todo/opzoeken ) has incorporated parts of other (Babylonian) religions—each god is responsible for controlling or creating one part of the universe. Yahweh, however, has created *everything*, which is a sheer difference. 

*26 And he made from one man every nation of mankind to live on all the face of the earth, having determined allotted periods and the boundaries of their dwelling place, 27 that they should seek God, and perhaps feel their way toward him and find him.*

These verses state that God put the people in several places on Earth (boundaries) with limited space (countries) and limited time, *so that* they should seek God. If man were not limited, would they then not seek God? Perhaps so, the foreseeing of the end of life is what makes them seek a god. But what would limits have to do with this then? The limits of a country and of an Earth, would mean that there is something else outside of this and that man would seek whatever there is, i.e. a god. #todo/nogaftemaken 
Could it mean that because of man's "ability" right now to cross those limits, that he has become arrogant? Man has been able to cross the boundaries on Earth by flying to whatever height and (almost) diving to whatever depth there is. Now it has (presumably) even crossed the boundary of the atmosphere and started its search for the unknown. So far they have found nothing yet except for dead planets. 
As for our determined time here on Earth, that has not been extended either. Compared to a few hundred years ago we have indeed been able to extend our lives, but that is only because man has managed to pollute the Earth so much with crowded cities without good sewage and hygiene that it caused its own demise through epidemics such as the Black Death and cholera. So all man has been able to is to extend our lives to the duration of before the Middle Ages, for back in Moses' time he already wrote that man would live up to the age of 70 and some 80. If that were the case, then there must have been a miscalculation or an exceptional period when the average lifespan was 60 years in the Middle Ages as most scientist claim these days. #todo/opzoeken just like this still is in poorer countries and some countries in Africa or in the Middle-East such as Morocco. 
Now, science has done a few things to let *some* men live longer. Through medical innovations those who can afford it can live longer, prevent diseases or get operations and medicine to extend one's life or improve the quality of life in later years, so that one is still able to walk and live healthy until the day they pass away. But still, on average not much has happened, a few years have been added on the total average lifespan, also because at the same time science has polluted this world with gasoline, radio-activity and all kinds of other radiation, chemicals and other substances in our air and water.
This verse is still true. It is the limitedness of man that allows him still to be little bit humble, to acknowledge that they have not found a planet yet on which sustainable life is present—and I am speaking of finding it, not even of arriving on it, if they could—and that their lifespan is extremely limited even with hypothetical cryogenic techniques to sustain life in suspended motion.

It is what keeps them from thinking they *are* gods or God Himself—although, unfortunately, they do let the world *think* they are, by continuously posting articles with titles such as "key to eternal life/sustainable planet *may* have been found!"—and *seek* Him or, as Paul says, *perhaps* will *feel*, not feeling God, but feeling their *way* toward Him and find Him, for for these people, those sceptical people, thinking is out of the question. It has been tried and failed. 

*Yet he is actually not far from each one of us, 28 for* 
*“‘In him we live and move and have our being’;* 
*as even some of your own poets have said,* 
*“‘For we are indeed his offspring.’* 
*29 Being ::then:: God's offspring, we ought not to think that the divine being is like gold or silver or stone, an image formed by the art and imagination of man.*

God is not far from us, both figuratively and literally. Literally, because He is everywhere, and figuratively because we look a lot like Him and are created in His image. 
It is because we are His offspring that we man is looking for Him. I am purposely not saying "man is looking for God" because they are not looking for *a* god nor are they looking for *God Himself*. They cannot be looking for the Lord God Yahweh, because they have never met Him, and they do not want to look for a *god* because man does not want to have a god to rule over them—they want to be their own god. No, man knows that he is not alone and has been created, and is looking for that being who created them. Yes, we have seen many tribes doing that and ending up with the worship of fake gods, such as African tribes and the Mayas, Incas, Aztecs and other South-American or Amazonian tribes. Their worship of something greater might be imbued in them by God, while they misuse it for a fake god, yet they do not wish to worship this fake god, but at the same time they cannot resist it. 
It is like the opposite of what Paulus mentions when he says he does not want to do the bad yet still does it. There is "good" in man, but also "bad" which he cannot resist. 
Now the devil makes use of these traits in mankind and abuses man's need to worship something, their longing for love and sex, food and peace and combines all of this in fake religions. Take any of the above religions and you will see that all of these elements are in there. They are worshipping a man-made god (who is still a man by the way, just like the pharaoh was), which allows or even commands sexual acts, and gives those worshippers and false idea of comfort and peace, thinking that a big enough house, food and money will provide peace. 

*30 The times of ignorance God overlooked, but now he commands all people everywhere to repent, 31 because he has fixed a day on which he will judge the world in righteousness by a man whom he has appointed; and of this he has given assurance to all by ::raising:: him from the dead.”* 

God may have overlooked the aforementioned religions, because these were clearly unaware of Jesus' arrival. Some of these religions in South-America still existed around the time when this was said (in approximately 50 AD) and it was hundreds of years later when the first ships with both "Christian" missionaries and soldiers would land on the east coast of South-America to conquer the continent and convert the Aztecs and expel their idolatrous religions. Unfortunately, many of them died, most due to the exposure to unknown diseases which the European men had become immune such as the measles. #todo/opzoeken/engels pokken
But if Paul literally meant what he said about "now" and "everywhere", how would these South-Americans even *hear* this command? The Chinese, and perhaps the Arabs and Persians, could have known about this repentance through their astrological knowledge. The Chinese even have it written in their historical annals that the sight of the star (or comet) of the arrival of Jesus meant that a prince would die for the sin of mankind. That alone would have been enough to for the people of China to repent, but the forrest tribes where much more primitive—in my perspective. On the other hand, maybe I am looking down on them too much, for they too had their own calendar with predictions and astrological "knowledge", just like the Egyptians. So perhaps they too would have known about Jesus and the command for repentance. In any case, we know that God is righteous and we can trust on Him for that. 

*32 Now when they heard of the resurrection of the dead, some mocked. But others said, “We will hear you again about this.” 33 So Paul went out from their midst. 34 But some men joined him and believed, among whom also were Dionysius the Areopagite and a woman named Damaris and others with them.* 

My contention in the previous part was that the tribes and peoples who had never heard the Gospel could have known not only the existence of God, but Jesus Himself, through astrology or any form, just like God had revealed Himself to the Chinese. However, Paul does mention that God has given *assurance* to all by raising Jesus from the dead. Now anyone could have seen a vision or something in the stars, but not everyone would believe the astrologists or prophets. One would need assurance for that. God has given this assurance to the Jewish people and to those who had seen Jesus after His resurrection, but all other peoples outside of Israel—but even within Jerusalem there were people who had never even heard the story of Jesus' resurrection—how would they get any assurance? 
Just like in other countries when one vision was seen, this did not mean that the whole country heard about it. The court of China had probably heard about the meaning of this star and it was then up to them to tell the people about this, just like the Ninevite king told his people to fast and repent in the time of Jonah's prophecy. It was furthermore also the people's responsibility to give ear to this command. 
In Jerusalem as well it was not the (local) government, but the Church and its apostles who had to testify about Jesus' resurrection and God's judgment. The Greek did not have this revelation, except for the one the Greek poet Epimenides received in 600 BC about an unknown God. But the same question remains: would the Aztecs and similar tribes or even more primitive tribes (such as in Africa) which did not even have astrology, have this knowledge about Jesus' resurrection? The answer here remains the same as well: we can only trust that God would judge on the basis of that which He has given. 

#biblestudy/devotionals/acts #tags/politics/abortion #tags/lgbt