# Acts 26 (ESV) 
***Paul's Defense Before Agrippa***
*1 So Agrippa said to Paul, “You have permission to speak for yourself.” Then Paul stretched out his hand and made his defense:*
*2 “I consider myself fortunate that it is before you, King Agrippa, I am going to make my defense today against all the accusations of the Jews,*

Assuming that Paul was not trying to flatter, he really considered himself fortunate even though he was speaking to one of the Herodian rulers, Agrippa II, whose father, Agrippa I, murdered John the Baptist by beheading and the apostle James, and under whose great-uncle Antipas' reign Jesus was be murdered. He might have been less cruel than Herod the Great, but why would Paul have been *fortunate*? First of all, regardless of Herod's opinion of Paul's innocence, Paul would have been sent to Rome anyway because Felix' decision overruled Herod's (see v.32). Second of all, even if Herod were to set Paul free, Paul most likely would not have accepted it anyway, for he wanted to go to Rome and speak to the emperor (Nero). God had already planned this (see Acts 27:24) and I do not think there was any other way to speak to the emperor except by indictment and appeal. This would mean that Paul needed to be captured before he could appeal to his Roman citizenship in order to have an audience with the emperor. 
The answer to this is given by *MacSBNnkjv* that Paul's intention was not to defend himself but to convert Agrippa, just as was his intention to speak with Nero. This would indeed be fortunate, when one has the chance to speak the Gospel to a person of power. 

*3 especially because you are familiar with all the customs and controversies of the Jews. Therefore I beg you to listen to me patiently.*

Paul was *especially* glad to meet Agrippa because of his knowledge of Judaism, which means he was also glad for other reasons. #biblestudy/questions what were those other questions? 
Still, Herod's knowledge could have set Paul free but why would Paul even consider himself lucky? Jesus did not care about whom He got to speak for His plan was to be killed by the Jews so that He could rise up again. 

*4 “My manner of life from my youth, spent from the beginning among my own nation and in Jerusalem, is known by all the Jews. 5 They have known for a long time, if they are willing to testify, that according to the strictest party of our religion I have lived as a Pharisee.*

If the Sadducees had not been partial but had actually contested the Gospel of Christ in a legitimate Judaic matter, Paul still would have won the argument. They would not have been able to damage Paul's reputation and so decrease his credibility before the judge, the High Priest, or the jury, which in this case would be the other priests.
They could, however, contest his deviation from the Judaic faith, even as a Pharisee. For the Sadducees accepted the doctrine of the Pharisees sect, but not those of the Christian. Both now were against Christianity during the life of Jesus, but after the court session with both of them present (in the previous chapter? #todo/opzoeken) it seemed like the Pharisees saw more good in the Christian faith than in the Sadducee doctrine.

*6 And now I stand here on trial because of my hope in the promise made by God to our fathers, 7 to which our twelve tribes hope to attain, as they earnestly worship night and day. And for this hope I am accused by Jews, O king!*

See also notes on [[2 Chronicles 30 (ESV)]] for an explanation of the *twelve* tribes, even though only two were taken in captive to Babylon and returned to Israel. 

*8 Why is it thought incredible by any of you that God raises the dead?*

Paul makes the argument here that what he believes is no different from what their fathers believed. All Jewish sects should have at least that thing in common. What they shared was a hope in God to one day return to Him **after one has died*.* This would mean that the dead are raised. 
Now the Sadducees might think that only soul would ascend to heaven, but Ezekiel, one of their own prophets, had already mentioned that the dead bodies would come back to life.

Paul also makes the argument why it is so hard to believe that God can do this? Can a God Who created heaven and Earth not just as easily restore a dead and decayed body? 

*9 “I myself was convinced that I ought to do many things in opposing the name of Jesus of Nazareth. 10 And I did so in Jerusalem. I not only locked up many of the saints in prison after receiving authority from the chief priests, but when they were put to death I cast my vote against them. 11 And I punished them often in all the synagogues and tried to make them blaspheme, and in raging fury against them I persecuted them even to foreign cities.*

The **cast [of the] vote** against the Christians by Paul is sometimes used to argue that Paul was part of the Sanhedrin. This does not seem likely to me, although I cannot prove this. Firstly, Paul had a profession of a tent maker. Members of the Sanhedrin were probably paid for full-time jobs and needed no jobs on the side. Of course, Paul could have learned the trade later on after his conversion, that is one counterargument. Secondly, it seems unlikely to me that a member of the Sanhedrin himself was active in persecuting Christians. This cannot be refuted by the possibility that Paul was not a member *yet* of the Sanhedrin and had later climbed up the ladder to become one, for he had gone on his way to Damascus personally. Thirdly, Paul does not recognize the High Priest Ananias, in Acts 26. Even though that event must have taken place around 60 A.D., which was more than twenty years after Paul had left the Jewish and Pharisee community after his conversion, the High Priest would not have been anyone new, but someone who had served for many years and shown his marks. Paul would have known and recognized him if Paul had actually been in those circles in those days. Now, granted, Paul might have known and recognized Ananias, but not know that he was the High Priest, as the persons in this office change irregular and quite often at times. 
In all, this is merely my personal view. 

***Paul Tells of His Conversion***
*12 “In this connection I journeyed to Damascus with the authority and commission of the chief priests. 13 At midday, O king, I saw on the way a light from heaven, brighter than the sun, that shone around me and those who journeyed with me. 14 And when we had all fallen to the ground, I heard a voice saying to me in the Hebrew language, ‘Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me? It is hard for you to kick against the goads.’*

Paul added this detail, perhaps to indicate that Jesus was first of all *actually* speaking to him. It was not a feeling or an inspiration, or a thunderous booming such as the ones around Paul probably heard, for they heard something but could not distinguish the words. Second of all this was an indication that Jesus is a Jew as well and that Christianity was meant for the Jews. 

*15 And I said, ‘Who are you, Lord?’ And the Lord said, ‘I am Jesus whom you are persecuting. 16 But rise and stand upon your feet, for I have appeared to you for this purpose, to appoint you as a servant and witness to the things in which you have seen me and to those in which I will appear to you,*

Jesus wanted Paul to be a witness of things that had not even happened yet. Usually Jesus asks us to be witnesses of what we have seen, of what Jesus has done in our life, but in this case there was still so much to be done by Jesus. Jesus would perform miracles and work through His Holy Spirit in the lives of people of which Paul could testify. 

*17 ::delivering you from your people and from the Gentiles::—to whom I am sending you*

"Delivering" means saving. In hindsight we know that Paul needed deliverance from both the Jews and Gentiles by whom he was persecuted for preaching the Gospel. Jesus already foretold him this part *before* the beginning of Paul's ministry. In other words, He told him: *I will send you to a people who will persecute you, but you must go there to open their eyes.* Jonah received a similar mission as well as all Christians now have (see Matthew 10:16-20).
Also notice how Jesus says that He appeared for this *purpose*: to deliver Paul from the Jews and Gentiles. At this point in time Paul did not need a deliverer yet. He was well accepted by the Jews and not harassed by the Gentiles. Still Jesus wanted him to be delivered from them. Without knowing, Paul was already entrenched in Jewish customs and religious moralism instead of having living relationship with God through faith by grace, which is the way of the Gospel. That too, was what he was delivered from.

*18 to open their eyes, so that they may turn from darkness to light and from the power of Satan to God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins and a place among ::those who are sanctified by faith in me::.’*

So not only "Christians", but also those before Jesus' incarnation such as Abraham, Moses and Elijah. 

*19 “Therefore, O King Agrippa, I was not disobedient to the heavenly vision, 20 but declared first to those in Damascus, then in Jerusalem and throughout all the region of Judea, and also to the Gentiles, that they should repent and turn to God, performing deeds in keeping with their repentance. 21 For this reason the Jews seized me in the temple and tried to kill me. 22 To this day I have had the help that comes from God, and so I stand here testifying both to small and great, saying nothing but what the ::prophets:: and Moses said would come to pass:*

See notes on [Matthew 22:22-33](bear://x-callback-url/open-note?id=0FB9A66E-B49F-44AB-8C0D-4D0176B2EDBD-61405-00004C777B15C713).  

*23 that the Christ must suffer and that, by being the ::first:: to rise from the dead, he would proclaim light both to our people and to the Gentiles.”*

Jesus was not the first person to rise from the dead, the widow from Zarephat's son was raised earlier by Elijah (see 1 Kings 17) as well as Lazarus, brother of Mary and Martha, who was raised up by Jesus Himself. However, Jesus is the only one thus far Who has risen from the dead to *stay* alive. The actual resurrection that comes not only with a new body—although Lazarus body was healed from its decay after approximately four days (see Jn 11:39) this was not a supernatural body like Jesus' was after His resurrection—but also with a new spirit. 

Does it matter whether Christ was the first or not? Yes, for if He were not the first, then where would this power have come from to resurrect? From God the Father of course—but this power would then have been given to one who is unholy. Now there are two resurrections, a "normal" one like Lazarus has experienced and a supernatural, like that of Jesus and which is due to all Christians in the End-time. The first one is possible to grant to unholy people, but it does not provide any rights to be with God. It is a "heavenly" body—although it will be used on the New Earth—pure from any blemish or impurity and meant for close contact and transparent relationship with God (see 1 Corinthians 13:12, Exodus 33:20), which is not possible with impure and unholy bodies or souls. 
So by definition this heavenly body which results from the supernatural resurrection can only be given to pure and holy people—of which there none (see for example Romans 3:10 (quoted from Psalm 14:3, Psalm 53:1,3,  Ecclesiastes 7:20) and 3:23)—and these in turn only exist when Jesus has *made* them holy by offering His blood. 

#todo  Add somewhere: Conversion of Pharisees in Acts 15:5 and John 3:1 but no Sadducees. 

*24 And as he was saying these things in his defense, Festus said with a loud voice, “Paul, you are out of your mind; your great learning is driving you out of your mind.”*

Festus was saying this because of Paul's statement of Jesus' resurrection and that Jesus would convert the Jews *and* the Gentiles. Perhaps the latter was even more incredible to him than the former, if he wondered why a Roman would ever believe in the Christian God and One Who was slain by Roman—and human—hands at that. If he had believed the former, however, the latter would not have been incredible anymore. If he had believed Jesus was God, then he would also not have doubted His resurrection. He, like most people, would doubt Jesus' divinity because of His meekness and His lack of defense and retribution upon His execution, which would not even have occurred if He had the power for it, but that is because they missed the Father's plan. A god does not only have divine character and powers, but also a divine plan. Even the Islam speaks of their god, Allah—whom they think is the same god as Yahweh, but is not—that he is a god of deception, see [Qur'an 3:52](https://wikiislam.net/wiki/Allah,_the_Best_Deceiver_(Qur%27an_3:52)). Things are not as they seem with gods, at least Christianity and Islam agree on that, but what Islam and the Roman religion agree on is that a god should show power and authority, and since that is not clearly visible to them in the New Testament-God, they conclude that our god must be fake or not as sovereign and all-powerful as we claim. 
The character these religions wish to see in their gods can be seen in its followers as well. Muslims show great power by instilling fear in their opponents, not only by killing, but by showing it visibly to all their enemies. This kind of behavior goes back to nearly all of the empires, one more cruel than the other, and tribes, where people cut of scalps of their enemies (such as the Native Americans), big toes and thumbs (African tribes), foreskins in the time of king Saul, and of course heads such as done by the Assyrian empire. All of these religions, tribes and empires lacked character, however. More specifically, they lacked the ability to teach their people love and mercy, causing their people to live under fear and duress. This makes it all the more easy to convert these people to Christianity where they can feel the safety of the Father, which is what all people long for. 
Unfortunately in the West, people now "escape" to the "safety" of atheism, not because of the strictness of the Christian religion, but because they have tasted this freedom and wanted more of this. People either are the oppressors and want the freedom to have everyone under their power to control them, or they are the oppressed and want the freedom to do whatever they want. Under Christianity they are neither. 
Under Christianity people *were* oppressed, whether one was the king or the servant, we were all oppressed by the Satan's temptation and by the Law, for we gave in to his temptations and then fell under the punishment of the Law. But now we have been set free by Christ and we have been set free from our longings to control people and our longings to be set free from control. Rather yet, from the perspective of the world, we do not mind whether we are a slave or master of someone (cf. Galatians 3:28, Colossians 3:11 and especially Ephesians 6:5-9), because we know we only serve God and we are master of none, but merely *stewards* of our children, wife and other disciples (cf. Ephesians 6:1-4). Spiritually seen, on the other hand, we long to be called a servant of God and especially good and faithful servants (cf. Matthew 25:23). 

#todo/nogaftemaken  Sketch tekening. Still to add, the part about Ephesians that we are stewards and not owners (perhaps also a difference in culture) and that we are not bosses but should proclaim and live out the Gospel from any position we're in. 

*25 But Paul said, “I am not out of my mind, most excellent Festus, but I am speaking true and rational words. 26 For the king knows about these things, and to him I speak boldly. For I am persuaded that none of these things has escaped his notice, for this has not been done in a corner. 27 King Agrippa, do you believe the prophets? I know that you believe.”*

According to *MacSBNnkjv* Agrippa was put in a difficult position whether he had to say he believed in the Prophets and therefore Christ must be true as well or say he did not and lose all credibility from the Jewish people because he rejected their Holy book and the Word of God. Even though Agrippa was saying this in a closed court, there could have been bystanders who could spread the Word, so that is why Agrippa would not have been eager on claiming the latter—although I do not believe he did accept the Prophets, for otherwise he would not have lived an incestuous life with his sister, Berenice. He could have simply said that he did believe the Prophets but did not believe that Jesus was the Christ. 

*28 And Agrippa said to Paul, “In a short time would you persuade me to be a Christian?” 29 And Paul said, “Whether short or long, I would to God that not only you but also all who hear me this day might become such as I am—except for these chains.”*

Again Paul shows how much more he cares about the spread of the Gospel than himself. Instead of petitioning his freedom he spends by trying to convince Herod to become a Christian. Paul now has spoken to people of increasing power, from the town clerk (a sort of mayor, in Acts 19:35) to the proconsul, Lysias (sort of a congressman, see Acts 21:33), the Sanhedrin (the Jewish council now, see Acts 23) and now even governors Felix and Festus (Acts 24ee). 
Paul has almost literally endured everything in Matthew 10:16ee, he has fled cities, been flogged, borne witness to all of these Jewish and foreign authorities and is now on his way to the authority of the greatest empire on the world at that time, the emperor, Caesar Nero, of the Roman Empire. God has kept his promise and has given him the words to speak, which we—blessed as we are—can read in this book. 

*30 Then the king rose, and the governor and Bernice and those who were sitting with them.*

It seems as if the king rose before the governor which makes me question who the real authority is here. Officially it would be the governor, Festus, who reigned on behalf of the emperor, but being Festus' brother-in-law, the one who betrothed his sister (Drusilla) to Festus and perhaps could take her back, and also being the tetrarch king of this part of Israel, Judea #todo/opzoeken, Agrippa did have a lot of power—perhaps even culturally in the sense that he got to rise from his seat first, even before the governor could do so. 

*31 And when they had withdrawn, they said to one another, “This man is doing nothing to deserve death or imprisonment.” 32 And Agrippa said to Festus, “This man could have been set free if he had not appealed to Caesar.”*

Now Lysias the proconsul realized this and wrote this in his letter to Felix; Felix realized this, Festus knew this and Agrippa confirmed this. None of them, however, released Paul. All of them will endure a harsh punishment for imprisoning God's servant, is what I think. Only Agrippa, who was not in the process, might be released from this—although he has done a multitude of other bad things—and Festus seemed to be interrupted by Paul's appeal. It is not certain whether Festus planned to release or to punish Paul, but perhaps he was stalling the process and Paul saw his corruption, or perhaps Paul wanted to skip as much as possible of this whole process and go to the emperor, after he had told Festus his testimony or after he realized that Festus was not open to the Gospel. 
This would be like wiping the dust off his shoes and going on to the next city. 

Notice that Paul did not do anything at all. He was beaten by a mob and accused of stirring up crowds and defaming and blaspheming the temple. Now none of those things were proven with corroborating eyewitness testimonies (is my guess) and the *Roman* guards could also have served as eyewitnesses to say whether they let Trophimus, the gentile friend of Paul, enter the temple, which was forbidden. 
So now Paul is in custody, although he lived in a house and was allowed to see his friends. But even though Festus realizes he is innocent, he is still treated as a prisoner and guarded by a centurion and later on—as we wil see—put on the same ship set to Rome with other criminals. It could even have been that Paul was handcuffed all the time on the ship. 

#biblestudy/devotionals/acts