# Acts 19 (ESV) 
***Paul in Ephesus***
*1 And it happened that while Apollos was at Corinth, Paul passed through the inland country and came to Ephesus. There he found some disciples. 2 And he said to them, “Did you receive the Holy Spirit when you believed?” And they said, “No, we have not even heard that there is a Holy Spirit.” 3 And he said, “Into what then were you baptized?” They said, “Into John's baptism.” 4 And Paul said, “John baptized with the baptism of repentance, telling the people to believe in the one who was to come after him, that is, Jesus.” 5 On hearing this, they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. 6 And when Paul had laid his hands on them, the Holy Spirit came on them, and they began speaking in tongues and prophesying. 7 There were about twelve men in all.*

This is the second time that Luke writes of believers who were baptized in John the Baptist's baptism or only knew that baptism. Aside from that, Apollos is mentioned in both these parts. Later, in 1 Corinthians 1 Paul would mentioned the different forms of baptisms people thought there were by the aforementioned people, although he argues that there is only one true baptism, that of Christ. 
It is good to hear that John's baptism had spread to even this area of Ephesus. John had disciples indeed and these (or their disciples) must have spread the word to this area or even further. Now it was up to Jesus' disciples to spread His Word which had been prepared by John's disciples. 
John's baptism made it easier for Jesus' disciple to spread the Gospel, for the repentance had already been preached to those disciples and accepted by them, and they had also accepted the coming of the Messiah. Now the "only" job the Christians still had was to tell them of the fulfilling of this person to come after John, and that it was Jesus of Nazareth Who had died and risen. 
The conversion of these Jews seemed to be significantly easier than to the other Jews. This of course could be a reason why God let John the Baptist spend his life on preparing the way for Jesus, so that the Christian disciples would have some leeway. As a matter of fact God already told Paul in his vision that "[God has] many in this city who are [His] people." This would have motivated Paul to not stop Evangelizing and leaving this city, but to remain and stay focused on those whose hearts God had already prepared, some of those through John's baptism. 

It is peculiar to see that the newly converted Christians were speaking in tongues. This has been, and still is, a matter of great debate as to whether this is part of receiving the Holy Spirit. Pentecostal churches emphasize this part and that is what separates them from other Evangelical and charismatic   denominations. 
Most definitely not all conversions noted in the New Testament are correlated with speaking in tongues, but there are no little amount of events in Acts that do show this correlation. The fact that some do not speak in tongues while the Bible *does* say that they received the Holy Spirit already is proof that tongues is but one manifestation of having received the Holy Spirit and not an exclusive one. 
A question we can ask ourselves then is why this manifestation of tongues was *allowed*—I am purposely not writing that this *gift* was given, for it is not written anywhere that it was gift which could be used at all times, but the manifestations are rather shown only to appear *during the receiving* of the Holy Spirit. 
In some occasions it is clear that the speaking in different tongues were clearly distinguishable and existing languages for those who came to see what was happening. In this case it is not clear where this baptism occurred now how many visitors came to see, but from the text we can suppose that this happened where water was available, so near the rivier, city or the lake opposite of the temple of Artemis (which fortunately now are mere ruins). Either of those places would have few to many people working there and would also attract people, seeing the strange act of baptism going on, just like it does today, even though everyone already knows what a Christian baptism is. In a flourishing city such as Ephesus, however, there would be many people from abroad speaking different languages. This would explain the significance of speaking in tongues and why this is did not happen or was not described at the baptisms of the household of the Philippian jailer, Crispus and others. 
*MacSBNnkjv* adds to this that the speaking in tongues served as tangible proof that they were part of the church since they were already believers and now needed to know and see the difference between John's baptism and the true baptism with the Holy Spirit, know that this Spirit actually exists (see verse 2) and know that this Spirit now indwelt them.

*8 And he entered the synagogue and for three months spoke boldly, reasoning and persuading them about the kingdom of God. 9 But when some became stubborn and continued in unbelief, speaking evil of the Way before the congregation, he withdrew from them and took the disciples with him, reasoning daily in the hall of Tyrannus.*

In my former church, the *CCGN*, we had a church worker, a temporary pastor if you will, to help the Dutch speaking part of our congregation mature more spiritually. In his opinion the congregation was not structured well—that is, the structure was not clear to everyone, the structure was prone to encounter cultural clashes due to an imperfect and unclear and even indecisive decision making methods—it was not according to the Bible—that is there were no clear roles and limitations for elders and deacons, nor was the election process clear—documents concerning all of the above did not explicitly state what the current way of working was, let alone the desired way of working, and many other flaws. In fact, in my opinion he was right, although it must be said that I have been influenced by him because he was my teacher. 
Many people in the congregation even agreed with him but the sphere drastically changed when he could convince the senior pastor of his view with however soft (in his opinion) a hand or method. Then he decided that the only way to implement this was to split the Dutch speaking part from the Chinese speaking part and then implement his views within the Dutch congregation. Many of the Dutch speaking part did not want to split ties with their family who were still in the Chinese speaking part. It was because  of this reason that the plan failed. 
Now in Paul's case he was right in his theology and just like this church worker he encounter opposition from the synagogue in this case. He then took the disciples with him just like our church worker wanted to. Was that the right thing to do for Paul? Yes, because in his case it was a matter of life and death—spiritually speaking. The new disciples would hear a wrong and incomplete message in their synagogue while the true Gospel had to be spread. 
In their synagogue they would likely be fighting against the tempest in order to convince their elders while outside of the synagogue the harvest was ready to be taken in. 
In a way it would have been better for this church worker if he had taken a few loyal disciples with him and started a new church. That church might have grown and become a church with more disciplined Christians than it has now. On the other hand, we can see the aftershock of that event. Of all the people who have left the church since, perhaps half still goes to church regularly, and an even smaller part is active and passionate about the church. Even fewer people have still stayed friends after these events. In my opinion, this church would eventually not have made it, because of a lack of love #todo/nogaftemaken 
In Paul's case, however, we may assume that he did not have this lack of love, that the purpose was higher than that of retaining family and relationships because it was about the Gospel and that it was the elders who were wrong. If we can be right about those three things, then we can legitimately take away people from church or in other words, cause a church division. 

10 This continued for two years, so that all the residents of Asia heard the word of the Lord, both Jews and Greeks.*

My unbelief leads me to take this last verse figuratively, for I would not know how a city of a couple of hundred thousand residents would be able to hear the Gospel spread by one man, and how literally *every person* would have heard the Word; Could there not be one person missing out on it? 
As said, it is my unbelief. I can think of a few reasons how this is possible. First of all, Paul's enthusiasm and passion was much greater than ours, as all missionaries' are. 
Second, his effectivity of reaching and converting people was much greater than ours. One could attribute that to multiple causes, such as the naivety and illiteracy of the people in those days, but also Paul's intelligence and knowledge of the Bible which was definitely more than ours, since he was brought up with it, had most likely memorized it and even though he lacked the New Testament (of which the biggest part was was written by himself), he had a direct revelation from God and never had to doubt about any interpretation of God's Word. Also he had a lot of extra information on the extra-Biblical events, such as that Moses was a profound speaker (see Acts 7:22, although that was Luke writing). 
Third, he also did many miracles which was a spectacle in itself. Through the Internet, one person may be known to millions with a stupid act, but the same effect could reach a whole city, without the Internet, through an amazing "act". So it would not be very rare if hundreds of thousands of people had heard of Paul or the miracles God had done through him. 
Fourth, Paul's converts started spreading the Gospel as well. With the seemingly fast rate with which Paul converted people through the power of the Holy Spirit, it would be only a matter of weeks before hundreds would have been converted and thousands who would have at least *heard* the Gospel. After months *thousands* would have been converted and tens of thousands would have heard it, or perhaps a hundred thousand if they were spreading it publicly on the market. After two years most definitely every one, except those who never went out on the streets or who could not understand the language or who never interacted with others socially and stayed far away from religion would have heard the Gospel *at least* one time. 

***The Sons of Sceva***
*11 And God was doing extraordinary miracles by the hands of Paul, 12 so that even handkerchiefs or aprons that had touched his skin were carried away to the sick, and their diseases left them and the evil spirits came out of them.*

How is this different from Catholic habits where people retain objects of so-called saints, or of chains and pieces of wood from Jesus' cross? It is different in the sense that Paul did not consider himself holy nor did the people carrying these objects. 
I believe that God would not allow others to be healed in His Name when their belief would be on the object, but even if they did, there is an explanation for that in the next paragraph. *God* needs to be the object of one's belief and the reason needs to be a desperate need for salvation. Yes, it is true that ten lepers were healed, but only one was saved. The nine did not believe or thank God for it, but in that case it was Jesus Who healed them. Jesus commanded them to be healed—whether they wanted it or not, they would become better. But in this case it was who wanted it themselves, perhaps even without Paul knowing about each case of a handkerchief that had touched him. 
It could be that these people only saw the miracles and had not heard or could not understand his prior message, but still believed the truth of these miracles. Would these people then be able to heal their sick with this handkerchief? No one can give a definite answer to that, but I do think that if a sick person is healed by a handkerchief, he would want to know who touched the handkerchief and gave it power. God would in this way have fulfilled his purpose by letting a person know Who it is Who healed him. Whether this sick person, who has heard nothing of the Christian doctrine, then decides to follow Christ or not is irrelevant. He has heard the Gospel and it is His responsibility now to listen and follow or to reject it. In any case the healed person and the person who carried the handkerchief do not have an excuse to God for not having heard the message or seen God's power. 

*13 Then some of the itinerant Jewish exorcists undertook to invoke the name of the Lord Jesus over those who had evil spirits, saying, “I adjure you by the Jesus whom Paul proclaims.”14 Seven sons of a Jewish high priest named Sceva were doing this. 15 But the evil spirit answered them, “Jesus I know, and Paul I recognize, but who are you?” 16 And the man in whom was the evil spirit leaped on them, mastered all of them and overpowered them, so that they fled out of that house naked and wounded.* 

Note that these sons of Sceva were already exorcists and even seemed to have this work as their life mission. In what way would they have exorcised the evil spirits before meeting Paul? The devil would be afraid of God as well. Perhaps these exorcists were even successful. Their mistake this time was that they used the Name of Jesus without knowing anything about Him or without truly believing in Him. They would be using Jesus' Name for their own purpose and that is why they lacked the power of the Holy Spirit and were attacked by the evil spirit. 
It does not matter in what stage of belief one is, but one must stay true to himself. One should not rely on methods to restore, exorcise or heal others or pray for others. The basis is always God. If we use a method because we see the success of others in it, and even if our intention for more success is because we want to expand God's Kingdom, then still we are doing the wrong thing at the wrong time. 
In the church where our current church is split from or *multiplied*, if you will, *LEEF! Rotterdam*, the rate of new converts was not as high as the pastor had hoped. There were about 40 converts in the five years of its existence and though the number of converts per year was growing each year, something seemed to be wrong. In the final year about half of the visitors and members of the church left, along with many helpers, so that there were not even enough people to maintain regular church services with sermons, let alone serving a brunch before the service. 
The pastor decided to focus more on cells, which are home groups with the purpose of multiplying. This idea came from a Brazilian man named Roberto Bottrel who experienced great successes with cell groups; also, in the Philippines this idea worked *like a charm* and multiplication was ongoing there. 
Now unlike the sons of Sceva the pastor was not ignorant of this method and did not simply implement this throughout his church before doing extensive research. Where the sons of Sceva lacked belief in Jesus Christ this pastor believed in this method, he believed in the power of God and he had good intentions. However, what has been given by God should be used to God's advantage, and not be replaced by another method. The sons of Sceva replaced their faith in God and His power to expel demons from people by calling upon a Jesus who was proclaimed by a random fellow named Paul, without knowing who either was. This pastor had not added to, but replaced his knowledge and experience of the traditional church with methods to reach out to the unbelievers, and thereby missed out on feeding his sheep, that is the Christians, who needed to be fed with the Word of God. He had made concessions in the depth of the sermon and in the music, that was the first reason why his church members left. 
Now, instead of reverting to the traditional church, he tried another method of cell groups, to fix the problem. The problem was that he did not use what he had (his knowledge of the Dutch and how to reach them), but that he used that which he did not have (knowledge of and experience with other cultures). In this particular case he wanted to use a method for hot climate cultures with church members from a cold climate culture in order to reach unbelievers from a cold climate culture.
The cell groups worked for other Brazil and Spain because they had nothing to begin with. They did not have (perhaps) a church with weekly meetings. They started the home groups because it was the only place where people were willing to meet, because people of the Spanish and Portugese culture are very keen to visit each other's homes. That is what they had and they could turn this visiting into weekly home meetings.
People of the Dutch culture do not have visits to each other's home like hot climate cultures do. Whenever I am at a Dutch person's home I feel like a *guest*—I do not feel at *home*. 
Turning church members' culture into opening their homes *and* making their guests feel at home is a great step and should be taken slowly, beginning by giving the example. This is one step the pastor already missed out on. He did not open his house regularly for church members to have meetings, feasts or celebrations or simply meals—and I am talking about more than just inviting one couple, but rather inviting about ten people to have a packed living room. Changing a culture needs to be done one step at a time *and* it requires having a long breath. 
I once heard of a couple who had been members of this church almost since the very beginning and who had never once been invited to the pastor's home. Now with a member list of thirty people a few years back it would be easy to have everyone at least visit one's house once a year. In the past year I have already visited each church member's house *multiple* times, and they they have mine, even aside from the Sunday meetings which were temporarily held in the homes. This is possible, but it is part of one's culture. Now in our case most of our church members are from hot climates, such as Surinam, Sri Lanka and China. 

*17 And this became known to all the residents of Ephesus, both Jews and Greeks. And fear fell upon them all, and the name of the Lord Jesus was extolled.*

Sometimes it is the failure of those who do not have the Name of Christ on them that extolls the Name of Jesus. During the challenge of Elijah against the 400 prophets of Baal the altar would not light up, while Elijah's was not only put on fire but completely consumed, along with all the water in the ditch greppel. This was what caused the people to believe in God again. 
~Not really a good example, I am looking for something where people merely fail, which usually would have been done well, but because of the presence of God, they could not do anymore.~ 
Zacharia, the father of John the Baptist, for example, could speak and no one perceived that as a miracle. However, it was his *inability* to speak that caused reverence for God, especially when God made him speak again after John received his name right after his birth. 

*18 Also many of those who were now believers came, ::confessing and divulging their practices::. 19 And a number of those who had practiced magic arts brought their books together and ::burned:: them in the ::sight of all::. And they counted the value of them and found it came to fifty thousand pieces of silver.*

One characteristic of not fully believing in the Holy Spirit—and there are not half-believers, one is either a believer or not—is that their attempts will fail when they do not put their faith in the Almighty God. A characteristic of people who *do* believe in God is that they will repent and do even more than that. Repenting to some means stop doing what is sinful, but it is more than just that. It also means that one starts doing the right things. One cannot merely stop walking in the wrong direction. Even turning around is not enough. One needs to walk in the right direction. This *always*, by definition, entails that one removes himself further from what is sinful and nears what is holy. (See also James 4:4,8 which says that friendship with the world cannot go together with friendship with God.)
The next step would be then to *leave* your history behind and make it impossible to return to it, in as far as one is able to. To what extent have we gotten rid of the things in our past that can still influence our spiritual life? 
There material things and immaterial things we can remove from our lives when they have a negative impact on our spiritual growth. Material things are for example objects, not necessarily occult, reminding us of our past or the wrong things we have done. Immaterial things are among others bad habits and memories.
Materials can usually be removed quite easily, but difficulty of disposal increases linearly or even faster with the value of the objects. Take for example death metal-related materials such as CDs and t-shirts. Those shirts can easily cost up to 50 euros. A whole bunch of CDs, DVDs and shirts could be thousands of euros. Aside from the value these materials, these things also represent a group one parts with—a group one used to belong to that accepted him when he was lonely. That also leads us to the next point.
Memories are the hardest to deal with. Traumatic events can lead to one's hopelessness and depression that cause one to stumble because of a lack of dependence and faith in God. Former sexual experiences are hard to forget because these are intertwined in our thoughts, memories and perceptions with which our brain is almost literally *wired*. Our brains are not databases that contain data that can be removed. Our brains are like neural networks that are fed by data. Even when the data has been removed, the neural network is the result. One could say that the intricacy of our character has been formed by the data that has been put in it, that is our past experiences and knowledge we have learned. Even when all is forgotten due to memory loss, one's character still has the same form. One could be afraid of changes, for example, due to bad experiences with continuous relocating, but often times people do not even know why they are afraid at all. 

Repentance begins with confessing one's sin to oneself and then to God. 
#todo/nogaftemaken 

*20 So the word of the Lord continued to increase and prevail mightily.*

The *so* here could refer to the burning of this *highly valuable* books or because of the fact that they burned it *in the sight of all*. 
The third characteristic is that one gives up something of high value. Of course one can stop doing something simple, such as eating too much sugar. If it was not an addiction for this person, it is simple for him to stop doing it and thus he is not giving up anything valuable. For a person addicted to food sugar or food would be something really difficult to give up and not only giving up, but realizing it is wrong, would mean a true repentance. The former person would not be able to even say repented from eating too much sugar. 
The fourth characteristic of true repentance is that one wants to show the world his changed ways and his wicked past. True repentance means one is ashamed of the things he has done and hence brings shame upon himself. If one does not find his former actions shameful, why would he repent of them? One does not repent of things he does not find shameful. When one has done shameful things one brings shame on himself, and in order to get rid of this shame, he must let others know that he does not do those things anymore. 
Now you could object to this and say that bringing shame on yourself can be removed by repenting before God alone. Indeed, God will not shame this person when he has repented, but others still will. If one does not care about what others think, then he could repent and tell God alone, but most people are not that thick-skinned. But even if there were a thick-skinned person who loved God, would he not tell others so that the reputation of God's children would be spared?  
Another characteristic of true repentance, the fifth one, related to the fourth, entails that one does not want others to commit this sin. So the repenting person would have to tell others about his sin and how he has changed by turning himself away from it, so that others might follow his example.

***A Riot at Ephesus***
*21 Now after these events Paul ::resolved in the Spirit:: to pass through Macedonia and Achaia and go to Jerusalem, saying, “After I have been there, I must also see Rome.” 22 And having sent into Macedonia two of his helpers, Timothy and Erastus, he himself stayed in Asia for a while.*

Pauls sends two helpers, disciples I may say, into Asia. This is different from Athens where he decided to go in first in order to check out the situation. 
So this is the order in which Paul went on missions with his disciples.
* Paul went into Macedonia together with his disciples
* He went to Athens by himself, leaving his disciples alone for a short while
* He went to Ephesus by himself (along with Aquila and Priscilla), leaving his disciples alone for a long time
* He sends out his disciples by themselves, while he stays alone
#church/material

*23 About that time there arose no little disturbance concerning the Way. 24 For a man named Demetrius, a silversmith, who made silver shrines of Artemis, brought no little business to the craftsmen. 25 These he gathered together, with the workmen in similar trades, and said, “Men, you know that from this business we have our wealth. 26 And you see and hear that not only in Ephesus but in almost ::all of Asia:: this Paul has persuaded and turned away a great many people, saying that gods made with hands are not gods.*

This Demetrius was totally oblivious to what Paul said because he only thought about money. Logically thinking any sane person would know that a god made with hands is not a god. Even according to the Roman and Greek religion they would know that the statues made by the gold- and silversmiths the shrines themselves were not gods, for they resided on Mount Olympus. 

*27 And there is danger not only that this trade of ours may come into disrepute but also that the temple of the great goddess Artemis may be counted as nothing, and that she may even be deposed from her magnificence, she whom all Asia and the world worship.”*

This is a clear example of creating awareness which Dinesh D'Souza #tags/famouspeople mentioned his book #tags/books *The Big Lie*. The common people do not even know there is a problem, only the craftsmen would realize the problem for them, financially. 
It seems like no one cared about the craftsmen losing their business, so the craftsmen had to think of another reason which they would care about. So he brought up the statement of Paul that hand-made gods are not gods. Now it is not clear whether the people would have minded Paul saying this, for it seems he had already stayed there for a while without any problems. The people probably would not have minded that Paul was converting Greeks to Christianity as long as some could keep their own religion. 
In the Netherlands we have the same situation where people on the streets do not mind Evangelization on the streets either as long as it does not touch their business—for business owners—or their time—for those who are not interested.
But then this Demetrius came up with the argument that their goddess may be counted as nothing, and that was a bridge too far. For this society too it is too far when we say that their lives—which is their god in a certain way—count for nothing, which is why the criticism on our street Evangelization is that they are not sinful or why our faith should be the true faith. 

*28 When they heard this they were enraged and were crying out, “Great is Artemis of the Ephesians!” 29 So the city was filled with the confusion, and they rushed together into the theater, dragging with them Gaius and Aristarchus, Macedonians who were Paul's companions in travel. 30 But when Paul wished to go in among the crowd, the disciples would not let him. 31 And even some of the Asiarchs, who were friends of his, sent to him and were urging him not to venture into the theater. 32 Now some cried out one thing, some another, for the assembly was in confusion, and ::most of them did not know:: why they had come together. 33 Some of the crowd prompted Alexander, whom the Jews had put forward. And Alexander, motioning with his hand, wanted to make a defense to the crowd. 34 But ::when they recognized that he was a Jew::, for about two hours they all cried out with one voice, “Great is Artemis of the Ephesians!”*

Does not the same thing happen these days, even when it is someone on the side of the Left, that when he mere *is* something, such as a heterosexual white male, he is already being ousted as a white supremacist, even before he has said anything? In this case it is not even clear on which side Alexander is. He is Jew and could be on the side *against* Christians, but not necessarily *for* the Greek. In current day terms he would have been something like an independent or Leftist, but not an extreme one, but because he would not have been extreme or *woke* enough, he would have been ousted anyway. 
The people really do not know what they are fighting for or who is on their side or why they are even protesting. They have all been influenced by the masses and follow the flock like sheep do. 
For hours in a row the people of the Left can stay outside screaming all kinds of things about being pro-choice, against racism and for transgenders, but they do not know that they are in fact working *against* all of the mentioned things. They want a woman to make her own choice, but she is forced by mere peer pressure, even from the people within Planned Parenthood #tags/politics/abortion who do not provide her with alternative feasible options and only speak of the negative impact of keeping her child. #todo/nogaftemaken speaking of pro-choice, how can anyone by pro-choice if there are no choices? (or not all the options are presented to her)?
racism will only get worse by emphasizing it
transgenders too are being lied to

*35 And when the town clerk had quieted the crowd, he said, “Men of Ephesus, ::who is there who does not know:: that the city of the Ephesians is temple keeper of the great Artemis, and of the sacred stone that fell from the sky? 36 Seeing then that these things cannot be denied, you ought to be quiet and do nothing rash.*

The town clerk used wise arguments to silence the crowd and prevent further actions. He used their arguments against them. 
Demetrius and the craftsmen were accusing Paul and the others of not minimizing Artemis, but there was none confirm this. If there was proof, this person would have to come forward and say that he used to believe that Artemis was a goddess, but now did not believe anymore. Of course there were such people, but they would either keep silent, because they were afraid to tell others publicly that they did not believe Artemis existed, or they had become Christians and would for that reason be silent. 
All other people who *did* believe in Artemis would also need to keep silent because they still believed and were the living proof that Paul's words did not have any effect on them. The only thing the angry believers could do, was to accuse Paul of having converted former believers of the Artemis religion, but somehow they did not think of that. 

*37 For you have brought these men here who are ::neither sacrilegious nor blasphemers:: of our goddess.*

The second argument was about sacrilege and blasphemy. Paul would of course not commit sacrilege because he would not even want to have these idols in his possession. As for blasphemy, I do not know exactly what Paul had said about Artemis, but if he had said that these shrines, idols or other man-made gods were not gods, that would be a true statement, even according to the Ephesian people. Perhaps Paul had not said that Artemis was not a true goddess, but merely focus on God and said that the Lord Yahweh is the true God of heaven and Earth. That would seem more likely as well. I have not heard of missionaries publicly claiming that all other gods are fake, although they would say this in a smaller circle, with more words to defend one. It is better to focus on our God and how God He is, when spreading the Gospel instead of on how bad someone else's god is. 

*38 If therefore Demetrius and the craftsmen with him have a complaint against anyone, the courts are open, and there are proconsuls. Let them bring charges against one another.*

The third argument is that there are proper judicial procedure to follow for charging complaints against anyone. Rioting is not the right way. The craftsmen knew that of course, but most of all, Demetrius knew that but sought an alternative way that would circumvent the courts because he did not have a case he could uphold. 

*39 But if you seek anything further, it shall be settled in the regular assembly.*

Why would the people have to go to a regular assembly but the craftsmen to court? #biblestudy/questions

*40 For we really are in danger of being charged with rioting today, since there is no cause that we can give to justify this commotion.” 41 And when he had said these things, he dismissed the assembly.*

#biblestudy/devotionals/acts #tags/lgbt #tags/events/pentecost