# Acts 12 (ESV) 
**James Killed and Peter Imprisoned**
*1 About that time Herod the king laid violent hands on some who belonged to the church. 2 He killed James the brother of John with the sword, 3 and when he saw that it pleased the Jews, he proceeded to arrest Peter also. This was during the days of Unleavened Bread.*

#todo/opzoeken dezelfde koning die Jezus had gedood? Nee, Herod Agrippa I #biblestudy/questions

*4 And when he had seized him, he put him in prison, delivering him over to four squads of soldiers to guard him, intending after the Passover to bring him out to the people. 5 So Peter was kept in prison, but earnest prayer for him was made to God by the church.*

It is so important that earnest prayer is made for those in prison. This is what gives the imprisoned hope. Although I still do not understand how this works, for it is God Who works and not our prayers and God does not work for us, how could prayer help then? In the case when God would let something happen but change His mind due to our prayers I would understand, but in the case where He did not change His mind, how would that benefit the prisoner then? 
There are two options, scenarios, assuming that God would not rescue, in this case, Peter. 
The first is that Peter was feeling uncomforted, perhaps sad and miserable. Because the people prayed for him, God might send our prayers or an emotional aggregate or representation thereof to him so that Peter will be comforted. So in this case it would be that God, Who initially did not comfort Peter, started doing that after (though not per se  chronologically) the Christians started praying. But this is the case where God changed His mind and is no different from letting Peter escape or not. 
What if God already comforted Peter. How then would prayer help? The prayers to God give hope to the Christians that God will listen to them. If, somehow, Peter could pass a message to the Christians and say that he feels that God is comforting them, then the Christians would know that God has listened to their prayers and their hope would be fired up, for they would know that God not only hears the prayers but would also answer them and act upon them. 
However, if the Christians had not prayed for Peter, and Peter would still have been comforted by God, and if Peter had then sent out a message to the Christians saying that he was comforted, what would then have been the situation? The Christians would still think that God is great, because even though they did not pray, God still worked.
In the case where Peter is not comforted and where the Christians do not pray, and where a message from Peter arrives at the Christians which says that he feels miserable and left alone, the Christians would realize that they should have prayed, and God would be honored in this way, but their repentance. 
But in the final case where Peter does not feel comforted while the Christians did pray, the Christians would wonder whether God has heard their prayer. In this case the Christians would need to gather their hope and pray even harder so that God hears them. This is a situation that I have not heard of often, because God is so merciful. 
There have been situations, I heard, where people literally knelt down in prayer for a sick person until their knees started hurting, and the person died anyway. I do not know of each person how they had come out of this battle, nor how this person was during this battle, but the one who told me could see God's sovereignty in it. He is the One Who decides what is going to happen and what happens is good, whatever the result, because it was His decision. 

In each case we can see that God is honored in some way—in our eyes, sometimes more and sometimes less. We may know that God never does anything that does not give Him glory. 
#church/material

**Peter Is Rescued**
*6 Now when Herod was about to bring him out, on that very night, Peter was sleeping between two soldiers, bound with two chains, and sentries before the door were guarding the prison.*

Any manmade effort to make things hard on God are as a shadow disappearing before the sun. As hard as Paul was, so easy it was for Jesus to appear to Him in a vision and change him. If God *wants* it, a person will be changed in a second. 
Here we see that Herod is making it difficult for Peter to escape by not only posing one squad, but four, which would be one for every six hours, and each squad made up of four people, of which two would be chained to Peter and two standing guard. If would even be impossible for the legendary Hiroshi #todo/opzoeken  #tags/famouspeople who escaped prison four times in Japan during the Second World War. #tags/historic events/wwii# But for God it as easy as a snapping his fingers, and the chains fell off. 
It goes so far that the guards were probably even asleep, all four of them and when they came to the iron gate, this opened *on its own accord*. Peter did not even have to push it! 
If God is on your side and has planned to set you free, you will be set free and you will encounter coincidences one would have never imagined. 
Take the stories of the missionaries of old who went abroad to reach the unbelievers. Adoniram Judson #tags/famouspeople for example went to Tibet #todo/opzoeken  or Nepal and while learning the language, having written the first Nepalese dictionary and New Testament, was the only person in Nepal who could speak English. It just happened to be that the English would attack Nepal and Adoniram was let go out of prison in order to be a translator. 
How God's ways can help us like letting people fall asleep, locked chains and locks be opened, and closed doors be opened by themselves! Amen. 

*7 And behold, an angel of the Lord stood next to him, and a light shone in the cell. He struck Peter on the side and woke him, saying, “Get up quickly.” And the chains fell off his hands. 8 And the angel said to him, “Dress yourself and put on your sandals.” And he did so. And he said to him, “Wrap your cloak around you and follow me.” 9 And he went out and followed him. He did not know that what was being done by the angel was real, but thought he was seeing a vision. 10 When they had passed the first and the second guard, they came to the iron gate leading into the city. It opened for them of its own accord, and they went out and went along one street, and immediately the angel left him. 11 When Peter came to himself, he said, “Now I am sure that the Lord has sent his angel and rescued me from the hand of Herod and from all that the Jewish people were expecting.”*
*12 When he realized this, he went to the house of Mary, the mother of John whose other name was Mark, where many were gathered together and were praying.*

Sometimes the realization of God's work comes later. It comes when the work has already been done. It was Peter himself who walked out of the prison, but it is obvious that it was God Who had prepared everything for him. Peter was so stunned that he did not dress himself or put on his sandals. The angel had to give him instructions to put on his clothes!
There is absolutely no credit to be given to Peter for escaping from prison. It is God Who did the work. Still, there were two things to realize here. First, he realized it was not a vision and that he had actually escaped. Second, he realized the grander plan he had escaped from, which was Herod's plan to kill him in front of the Jews and thereby elevating him as the savior of the Jews, saving them from a "wicked" and blasphemous theology, which would be Christianity. 
In our lives as well we can see this pattern whenever God has worked a miracle. At first we do not realize it is God Who works. When I got or did not get a certain job I thought it was because of my talents or my failures, respectively. In hindsight on the middle long term, I saw it was God's hand to lead me to a better or more fitting job, where I could learn the prerequisites for a future job. This still is a shortsighted view of God's plan, however, for His plan is not to forever lead me to better jobs so I can make a career. His larger plan, as far as I could have seen, was to learn specific skills which helped me help the church, understand people and help out companies. Moreover, I have met specific people during those jobs of which the experiences have taught me a great deal about life and others. 
God must have prevented many bad things as well by ending my job, such as the wrong influences from certain colleagues such as materialism, atheism and sexism. 
Many people, however, do not see the hand of God in their life even when He has already brought them to the street outside of the prison. They still think they are inside a vision, not living out their freedom, because they think their body is still inside the prison and in the mean time they are only thinking about what the next step is, but the angel has left them long ago. 

*13 And when he knocked at the door of the gateway, a servant girl named Rhoda came to answer.*

Three characteristics of Rhoda come to my attention: she was a servant and a woman and a child, by the designation of girl instead of woman. She would have had a very low stature. On top of that, perhaps she was not even Jewish. I have heard that Jewish people held gentiles as servants instead of their own people. 
As a side note: In this case, I might expect she had become a Christian or Jew already, living with faithful such as John Mark and recognizing Peter's voice would mean she had heard him before and probably knew him. Her joy also indicates that she is genuinely happy to hear that Peter is back. 
So perhaps due to the low stature she had, despite being treated well, it could be that she had no authority and hence the believers in the room did not believe her.

*14 Recognizing Peter's voice, in her joy she did not open the gate but ran in and reported that Peter was standing at the gate. 15 They said to her, “You are out of your mind.” But she kept insisting that it was so, and they kept saying, “It is his angel!” 16 But Peter continued knocking, and when they opened, they saw him and were amazed. 17 But motioning to them with his hand to be silent, he described to them how the Lord had brought him out of the prison. And he said, “Tell these things to James and to the brothers.” Then he departed and went to another place.*

What was needed here, was to open the door. That was the only way to verify if what she said was real. Notice that the group was discussing while Peter was knocking the door. The answer is so obvious and there is only one action they needed to take to verify it. Unfortunately we are like that as well. We had rather discuss and prove ourselves right by discussion than that we take the easy way and prove it with facts.
Why do people not do that then? Why do people still discuss #tags/historic events/corona# the Coronavirus or live this out as if it is real without doing any real research? They see what others "say" on YouTube and they comment back that it is not true or even make their own video, while the proof is out there. Perhaps they are doing research, but they are ignoring the hints, just like the believers in the room were neglecting Peter's knocking. 

*18 Now when day came, there was no little disturbance among the soldiers over what had become of Peter. 19 And after Herod searched for him and did not find him, he examined the sentries and ordered that they should be put to death. Then he went down from Judea to Caesarea and spent time there.*

The miracles of God cannot be explained away. If only people accept that, it would not be a problem as it is today. But because man in his arrogance *requires* and explanation they either make up a new apology or they put the focus on something else by blaming someone. This was true for the miracle of Peter's escape, but it is also true for the theory of natural evolution and the other types of evolution (such as the cosmic and chemical evolution) except for the last type, which is micro-"evolution". 
Just like the Jews made up a story of Jesus' body disappeared and apologized for that by saying the Roman soldiers fell asleep and the Jews stole his body, in the same way atheists reject the Six-Day Creation and make up a new version of evolution explaining today's biodiversity and workings and functions in organisms, leaving out a lot of discrepancies because these are not explainable. 
The atheists could simply have said that they do not believe in the Creation and that would have been it. But instead they had to think of a whole new theory, even though it leaks on all sides and all the while they are putting the focus on how fantastic and imaginary the theory of Creation is—and hiding evidence for that, even though they could have just rebutted that.

**The Death of Herod**
*20 Now Herod was angry with the people of Tyre and Sidon, and they came to him with one accord, and having persuaded Blastus, the king's chamberlain, they asked for peace, because their country depended on the king's country for food. 21 On an appointed day Herod put on his royal robes, took his seat upon the throne, and delivered an oration to them. 22 And the people were shouting, “The voice of a god, and not of a man!” 23 Immediately an angel of the Lord struck him down, because he did not give God the glory, and he was eaten by worms and breathed his last.*
*24 But the word of God increased and multiplied.*
*25 And Barnabas and Saul returned from Jerusalem when they had completed their service, bringing with them John, whose other name was Mark.*

It is clear that Herod was punished for his arrogance. He was even kept from the punishment for all of his misdeeds, such as the killing of James, John the Baptist and most of all Jesus Christ. #todo/opzoeken zelfde herod?
God can be patient even when His children are being murdered, which is a sin of Herod, but at the same time a blessing for His children, because they will end up in heaven; it will seemingly stop God's work for a little while, but it will eventually only increase the spread of the Gospel. 
This arrogance is even more dangerous than all the other sins. Why is that? A sin like killing others would not directly lead others into thinking that they can do that as well. The angry and Jesus-opposing Jews followed suit after Stephen was illegitimately killed indeed, but this does not mean that all Jews were part of the conspiracy to eradicate the Christians. 
An arrogance like that of Herod, however, which led the people of Tyre and Sidon, Jews nonetheless exalting a non-Jew into a living god, should be rebuked immediately, given the adulterous nature of the Jews. 
The Jewish people's behavior is really a codependent one. After having been punished by being exiled to Babylon, losing about 80 percent of its population by the Assyrians and leaving behind another perhaps 50 percent #todo/opzoeken  in Persia, they finally repented. Then for 400 years they have been set free from a real dictator, being able to build up their city and worship God in His temple and His city, Jerusalem. Then a dictator comes, the megalomaniac King Herod the Great, who kills all children under two in Rama or Bethlehem #todo/opzoeken and has done a great many sins besides that, and the Jewish people start worshipping him—whether genuinely or not, they should never have done that. 
Why would they ever return to such a king? Just like with all codependents, it is because Herod incites a fear in them, which shows them power, which gives them the feeling of protection. They might be abused by their ruler, but at least they will be protected from other rulers. 
This also means that they do not fear God. What they want is not bad. God can give them everything they want. He can be their ruler and protect them from other rulers, but without being a bad ruler of His own people. The people, however, do not see the wrath of God or His strength. Partly because God—in their eyes—is too patient.
A common theme in movies is where a person feels that not enough measures are taken by the leader and that the leader should have been more strict and vengeful and is being too soft, perhaps because one of the criminals is his own son. Harvey, *Two Face*, from *The Dark Knight* #tags/movies is one of those characters under the first category, who runs off and becomes an arch-nemesis of the hero. Other characters might even end up as an anti-hero in their own spin-off.


#biblestudy/devotionals/acts