# Acts 16 (ESV) — origineel
***Timothy Joins Paul and Silas***
*1 Paul came also to Derbe and to Lystra. A disciple was there, named Timothy, the son of a Jewish woman who was a believer, but his father was a Greek. 2 He was well spoken of by the brothers at Lystra and Iconium.*

One's reputation is an important possession, if you will. Secularly seen one's reputation is needed when looking for a job or borrowing money because others who do not know you will have faith in your reputation. That is why many businesses do their best in keeping their customers satisfied because they do not want their reputation to suffer and by definition new customers do not know the business. Bad companies keep changing their names, however, because a reputation cannot be changed, unless the bad things that were done concerned things far in the past or when there is an organization who can cover it up. Volkswagen is such a company, which built cars for the Nazis, and Ford as well, who supported them, perhaps monetary, but definitely in spirit. Their bad reputation has gone, perhaps because of the time that has passed, because no one knew about the money flows or because the American and German governments covered these things up. On the other hand, people perhaps never cared about a company's philosophy, but more about the quality of the cars, and in both cases this was never a problem.
In the case of humans, however, it is not easily possible to change one's name and in effect one's reputation. One would need to move and start a new life in another city, preferably in the country where no one knows about your past. Even then, it would take considerable time for people to trust you, because no one can see what is happening behind the door. Even fellow church members might be deceived by outer appearances, not knowing of each other what lies beneath, whether positive or negative.
Lately there was even an article in the news where a man sexually molested his granddaughter and his son never expected his father ever to do such a thing. The man claimed that it happened due to the loss of his wife, not because of sexual deprivation, but because he was #todo/opzoeken/engels verward and just wanted to make other people happy and thought he could do that in this way. If that is the case then, of course, it is always hard to know what happens behind closed doors, because situations keep changing, but aside from these exceptions it is always hard to truly know someone unless we we enter each other's lives and allow others to enter ours.
That is why it is so important that as church members we become one family and help each other, but also for those who need help to #todo/opzoeken/engels aangeven that they need help and what their problem is. What lies beneath is dirty. A discipler I met on the ICP (International Church Plant) Conference in Athens, Greece, once told me: #quotes/church
> "Discipling is a mess. But you are going to clean it up together with him and keep on doing it."   
The fact that Timothy had a good reputation in an semi-Eastern culture (of Greece) where there was a lot of social control and that even the Jews spoke good of him while he was only half Jewish, means that Timothy must have done something right. This allowed Paul to take Timothy on his journey, even though he was not a leader yet (as can be seen in the first letter to Timothy #todo/opzoeken) nor a prophet as far as we know. But Paul had confidence in him and must have been led by the Holy Spirit, for we see in the rest of his epistles that Timothy had remained faithful until the end.

*3 Paul wanted Timothy to accompany him, and he took him and circumcised him because of the Jews who were in those places, for they all knew that his father was a Greek.*

Was Paul going against his own decree here that circumcision was not necessary? No, circumcision was indeed not necessary, and it should not be be put on the Christian Gentiles as a yoke, but it was allowed to circumcise if one wanted to. Also, we have to notice that the decree was meant for the Gentiles who had become Christian. To those who were not Christians, the threshold should be lowered so that they become Christians. In this case, however, it seemed wise to Paul and Timothy that the threshold for the Jews could be lowered if Timothy were circumcised. 
Christians should be willing to go the extra mile so that non-Christians should not, in order for them to accept Christ as their Savior. 

*4 As they went on their way through the cities, they delivered to them for observance the decisions that had been reached by the apostles and elders who were in Jerusalem. 5 So the churches were strengthened in the faith, and they increased in numbers daily.*

What is the relation between decisions of apostles and elders in Jerusalem and the strength of the faith in the local churches in Greece and Turkey? 
Would our local congregation be stronger in our faith if some authority, such as our mother church LEEF! or an organization such as HeartCry gave us a rule book? Some might say *no*, for they see more rules as more oppression of freedom. 
But have you noticed how many churches have split here in the Netherlands? I think the average age in our church is about 30 years old and most of us have been aware of our surroundings and what is happening in our churches since we were fifteen years old. How many churches have split up in your time? 
I personally know of three splits in the church, one of those even coming from a former church separation. I have heard of two more church splits from before I was born or when I was too young to realize this. So that is five church splits in the two Chinese churches I have been to. 
Why did these splits happen? I am not specifically talking about the splits in the churches where I was, but why do they happen generally? First of all, from a lack of love, but second of all, from a lack of theological consensus. Because of the former, the latter cannot be resolved and each goes their own way—unfortunately, usually, separating in their relationships as well. 

What would have happened if our congregations had a mother church, like the one in Jerusalem, with apostles chosen by the Lord Himself, would that resolve the problems Christians have when they do not agree? 
Now you might think of Roman-Catholicism where there is an ultimate decree by the pope who decides on issues, but I do want to mention that first of all Roman-Catholicism does not have this #todo/opzoeken/engels uitgangspunt to not put a heavier yoke on people than necessary, as has been shown in history and still is in its decrees when repenting, for example, and it is marred by rituals and meaningless traditions as well. 
Second of all, Roman-Catholicism does not have the authority the apostles had, which results in sub-optimal solutions unlike the first church which received its answer directly from the Holy Spirit. 
So leaving aside the thought of an imperfect authoritarian mother church with a far from perfect purpose, but looking at the decrees and rules themselves, when written out of love, these are a medicine for *prevention* of church separations. 
Remember that this is only a solution for the second part, the lack of theological consensus; the first part needs to come from each individual. 

**Example.** ~~document on homosexuality at LEEF! This example might be too sensitive~~
Eddie Bakker's church, person who did not want to repent and had to be pulled back by distancing or expelling him from the congregation. The consensus made that there was peace, even if some members of the congregation were family of the expelled #todo/opzoeken/engels person. 

***The Macedonian Call***
*6 And they went through the region of Phrygia and Galatia, having been forbidden by the Holy Spirit to speak the word in Asia. 7 And when they had come up to Mysia, they attempted to go into Bithynia, but the Spirit of Jesus did not allow them. 8 So, passing by Mysia, they went down to Troas. 9 And a vision appeared to Paul in the night: a man of Macedonia was standing there, urging him and saying, “Come over to Macedonia and help us.” 10 And when Paul had seen the vision, immediately we sought to go on into Macedonia, concluding that God had called us to preach the gospel to them.*

It seems like Luke joined from verse 10 on, which would be in Troas or on their way to Troas. This could explain why God did not give Paul this vision earlier, for he would have then missed out on meeting Luke. One reason for missing out Luke would be that perhaps Paul would have taken the shortest route to Troas in a straight line, instead of going through the north, bordering Bithynia. Somewhere on this longer route he might have met Luke. Another possibility is that Paul would have been too eager to go to Macedonia that he would step on the first boat available to Macedonia, while now, Paul did not know what to do and perhaps stayed in Troas until God gave him this vision. Within these few days Paul may have met Luke and continued his journey with him. 

***The Conversion of Lydia***
*11 So, setting sail from Troas, we made a direct voyage to Samothrace, and the following day to Neapolis, 12 and from there to Philippi, which is a leading city of the district of Macedonia and a Roman colony. We remained in this city some days. 13 And on the Sabbath day we went outside the gate to the riverside, where we supposed there was a place of prayer, and we sat down and spoke to the women who had come together. 14 One who heard us was a woman named Lydia, from the city of Thyatira, a seller of purple goods, who was a worshiper of God. The Lord opened her heart to pay attention to what was said by Paul. 15 And after she was baptized, and her household as well, she urged us, saying, “If you have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come to my house and stay.” And she prevailed upon us.*

Apparently Lydia was not a Christian yet, for she had not been baptized, although she was a worshiper of God. I assume she was not a Jew either, for it would have been mentioned then. Perhaps she had heard about the Judaic faith or heard about the Christian faith from a Jew who had travelled to Jerusalem during Pentecost and then came to believe in the Lord Yahweh. 
We also read that it was the Lord Who opened her heart to even *pay attention*. I would assume, although this depends on one's theology, that that God also willed her (see Philippians 2:13) to *want* to accept the Christian faith and then *gave* her the faith (see Ephesians 2:8) to believe in it. All of this is aside from the fact that Paul just happened to be there on that Sabbath and meet her while there could have been many circumstances causing him to miss her, and all of the coincidences which had led her to meet the first Jewish person or believer to tell her about the Judaic faith. 

***Paul and Silas in Prison***
*16 As we were going to the place of prayer, we were met by a slave girl who had a spirit of divination and brought her owners much gain by fortune-telling. 17 She followed Paul and us, crying out, “These men are servants of the Most High God, who proclaim to you the way of salvation.” 18 And this she kept doing for many days. Paul, having become greatly annoyed, turned and said to the spirit, “I command you in the name of Jesus Christ to come out of her.” And it came out that very hour.*

The devil's tactics are known from what he used against Adam and Eve, which in the same way he used against Jesus, which are lies 
* challenging one not being able to do something ("Surely you are not allowed to eat from every tree?", turning stones into bread) 
* tempting with ease or sloth, and great gains for small effort (it was very ease to get knowledge for Eve and Jesus to get all riches) 
* false promise of protection (you will surely not die from eating that fruit or when jumping off the cliff because God will protect you) 

But now comes another tactic. He uses the truth and the whole truth, proclaiming this on the streets. In fact, his tactic is to disturb the plan of God. It is not as if he knows the plan of God, for His ways are higher than our ways, and higher than the devil's ways as well and the devil did not know that even this stint, which caused Paul and Silas to be imprisoned, would lead to the conversion of the jailer. As a matter of fact, everything the devil does will lead to more conversions and is always working towards God's plans. It would be best for the devil to not lift a finger, for everything he touches, though death occurs, will also lead to more faith. At the least if the devil did not do anything, and when mankind would destroy itself, which it would do anyway, albeit in a slower pace, the devil could say that all of the good things that happened were not because of his actions. 
However, the devil also has the motive to catch as many souls for hell as possible. He might not be able to stop Paul and Silas, but he has caught those masters of the slave girl, who can now be accused of false testimony and slander of the disciples of God. That is true, the devil now has a number of Romans and in previous and later chapters, Jewish riot instigators in his home. But would these people not have ended up there anyhow? The devil cannot say that they *might* have ended up there, but now certainly will. Neither would it make sense to say that they would end up a bit earlier in hell or that they can now be punished even more in hell, because of the eternal character of punishment in hell.

*19 But when her owners saw that their ::hope:: of gain was gone, they seized Paul and Silas and dragged them into the marketplace before the rulers.*

When all hope is gone, people start using desperate measures, tactics that are below the belt which almost always include lies, the conviction by the masses—instead of by the truth—and the finding of a common goal. This is exactly what the Left is doing and has been doing for the last few years and probably will continue doing, not only because they do not mind to go for these low tactics, but also because they do not have hope anymore. The Left has become afraid of the truth. More truth is spilling out on the streets concerning the roots of *Black Lives Matter* (BLM) #tags/politics which started in Charlotte, but which is mostly a lie. This movement started upon the deaths of Eric Garner and Michael Brown but the PragerU video *the Ferguson Lie* shows that at least the latter was not killed innocently but out of legitimate self-defense.

*20 And when they had brought them to the magistrates, they said, “These men are Jews, and they are disturbing our city. 21 They advocate customs that are not lawful for us as Romans to accept or practice.”*

The tactic the owners are using here is cover their self-interest with a disturbance of the city and of "us Romans", trying to create the group feeling. It is very clear that the owners did not care about what people believed in, as did the silversmith who made statues to Athena #todo/opzoeken  which goddess? 
All they cared about was the money. 
They had to find a greater cause that would stir up the crowd and so they used their city and anything against Romans, because Paul and Silas probably were visibly non-Greek—although I do wonder about any clear differences between Jewish and Greek people, since both are a bit tanned and have black hair. 
Now when we take a look at politics at the period when segregation was still legal, people of the Left stirred up white people to say that the black or the Mexican community were disturbing the American way of living. While that was true in part due to the high rates of criminality, the Left uses the same argument *in the present* to say that white, straight Christians are disturbing the American way of living by being against gay marriages and wanting a stricter immigration policy with closed borders. 
They use lies, conviction of the crowd and the common goal to reach their target: power over the people. I have created the following abbreviation C.C.C. to remember this tactic: 
* Find or **create a common goal**
* **Control** the information (through news, entertainment and education)
* **Convict** the crowd
So first, the Left spreads lies through a variety of media, based on what the common goal is. In the fifties and sixties this was segregation, in the seventies this was the peace and no war and feminism, in later years this became equal rights for gays, and lately this has become the acceptance of all genders *being* equal (that is, man and woman are equal and anyone can be a man or woman if he or she wishes so at any moment of the day). 
Whatever the common goal is of the people, the Left will always find a way to create lies that the Right is not sharing this goal. 
As a matter of fact, I would even say that the Left not only creates lies about the Right, but also about the goals itself. Man were never women and vice versa until Leftist *doctors* decided so. Somehow the idea popped up that transgenderism is no longer a mental illness and is not a matter of nature, but of nurture. According to them children should be stimulated to choose their gender and never taught to behave like a girl or boy, because there is no typical gender-like behavior.

*22 The crowd joined in attacking them, and the magistrates tore the garments off them and gave orders to beat them with rods.*

Here again we see that the higher officials, in this case the magistrates, were under pressure of the crowd, who in turn were incited by the owners. They were so perhaps under so much pressure that they could not do anything but cave or stay loyal to their moral values—and they chose the former, for which they would be sorry later. 
#tags/politics Politicians do the same these days. Sometimes the public comes with a resolution they do not support. Gun safety and gay marriages for example are two things not everyone supported in the past. Presidential candidate Joe Biden #tags/famouspeople told people to buy a gun on national television in an interview, but now, under immense pressure of the Left where all shootings are blamed on the gun manufacturers and the law that permits everyone with a license to buy guns, politicians who want support from the Left are afraid to say what they want and only say what the public wants to hear in order to get their votes, even if what the public says is impossible—such as free healthcare for everyone—or immoral—such as gay marriages, something of which former president Barack Obama #tags/famouspeople was against in the past of but has become in recent times a proponent; strangely this happened during his presidential years, probably in order to secure a second term. 

*23 And when they had inflicted many blows upon them, they threw them into prison, ordering the jailer to keep them safely. 24 Having received this order, he put them into the inner prison and fastened their feet in the stocks.*

***The Philippian Jailer Converted***
*25 About midnight Paul and Silas were praying and singing hymns to God, and the prisoners were listening to them, 26 and suddenly there was a great earthquake, so that the foundations of the prison were shaken. And immediately all the doors were opened, and everyone's bonds were unfastened.*

Here is another example of how the Holy Spirit works after prayer (and this time also singing) in unison.

*27 When the jailer woke and saw that the prison doors were open, he drew his sword and was about to kill himself, supposing that the prisoners had escaped. 28 But Paul cried with a loud voice, “Do not harm yourself, for we are all here.”*

*All* the prison doors were open yet none of the prisoners had escaped. Why would God open *all* the doors and why did they not escape. It seems verse 25 gives the clue, namely that the "prisoners were listening to them." Luke had no need to write down this description of the surroundings unless it were relevant. I believe the prisoners were touched by Paul en Silas' example of praying and singing hymns to God despite their situation and they would soon realize that it was thanksgiving to God *because* of their situation, because without this situation they would not have been able to show the miracle of how God can control earthquakes, open all prison doors open, and use this situation to make the jailer and his whole household believe, and then even voluntarily go back to prison to spend the rest of the night there. 
These events, including the hearing of the Gospel—as I cannot imagine that when Paul and Silas told the jailer about the Gospel, the other prisoners and jailers did not hear that as well—might have brought the other prisoners and jailers to convert or at least have a change of heart as well. The other prisoners would at the least already have a slight change of heart, because they did not make use of the situation to escape. 
So the power of providing a good example, through prayer and hymns, and other ways as well, saves lives. It saved the life of the jailer, who wanted to commit suicide, and perhaps it saved the lives of the prisoners as well, at least for those who now believed in the Gospel of Jesus Christ. 

*29 And the jailer called for lights and rushed in, and trembling with fear he fell down before Paul and Silas. 30 Then he brought them out and said, “Sirs, what must I do to be saved?”*

Is it not strange that the jailer's first act was to kneel down before Paul and Silas. The jailer must have realized that this earthquake was a supernatural event because it released all the doors and bonds. Perhaps the jailer had also heard about Paul and Silas' evangelism and their proclamation of the Lord of the heaven and Earth, or perhaps he heard their singing and logically deduced that the Earthquake was related to that as it immediately followed it. 
Even more strange than kneeling before two strangers who might possess godly powers is his next question: "What must I do to be saved?" Why would the jailer immediately think of salvation? If Paul and Silas were two Greek or Roman gods, just like the people in Lystre thought Paul and Barnabas were Hermes and Zeus, respectively, it would be logical that the jailer worship them, but not ask a question like this. Apparently, and as usual, the earthquake instilled in him the fear of losing his life. On top of that, he thought of losing his life again for losing his prisoners. Now he was on the verge of death, literally, for two times, for an earthquake could have easily killed him as well, if only by a mere stone from the ceiling falling on his head, and the second time of course when he tried killing himself. 
This relief of not having to die because the prisoners were still there had probably given him the hope of life, yet not merely living in the way as he had done until then, under continuous pressure of natural disasters, one's own boss or merely keeping one's job to take care of the family, but to be really saved from this kind of living. 
His question was the right thing to ask and it was particularly special because of the fact that this question was one that a Jew would ask, but not a Roman. 

*31 And they said, “Believe in the Lord Jesus, and you will be saved, you and your household.”*

In 1 Corinthians 1:16 Paul speaks of only Crispus, Gaius and Stephanas' household being baptized by him, as far as he could remember. The latter household came up as a correction, obviously seen from the way of writing, and since Paul did not have a way to insert or correct his text, like we can with word processors, he had to add a sentence to correct himself. Stephanas is not correlated with the Philippian jailer in most of the commentaries on Biblehub.com (except for Barnes' Notes and Gill's Exposition) nor in the *MacSBNnkjv*, which I find peculiar. At the least this theory of them being the same deserves a mention, even if it cannot be proven. 
Granted, it cannot be proven that the Philippian jailer was baptized by Paul, it could have been Silas as well, and also, it cannot be proven that the two were the same, for Paul could have forgotten about the jailer—although that seems very unlikely. 

*32 And they spoke the word of the Lord to him and to all who were in his house. 33 And he took them the same hour of the night and washed their wounds; and he was baptized at once, he and all his family. 34 Then he brought them up into his house and set food before them. And he rejoiced along with his entire household that he had believed in God.*

Paul told the jailer what he needed to hear about Jesus Christ, and he converted. It is not clear whether the jailer then washed his wounds or let his household hear the message again, which would probably take a little bit more time, because they did not know of the miracle or the release or where Paul and Silas came from. From what it is described, it seems the latter was the case. This again shows how great the love and passion is that Paul and Silas had for the unsaved—aside from the singing at *midnight* after having been beaten—which is but an extract of the love that the Father has for us, as well as the suffering. 
The jailer also shows his love for his family because he wants his family to hear the message of the Word of God, so much that he forgot about Paul and Silas' suffering for a bit, or perhaps thought that this message was more important than their flesh wounds. 

The jailer symbolically shows his regrets and his newfound love for God and His people by washing his wounds. From the text it seems he did not even order other people to wash Paul and Silas' wounds for them, but it himself. He took responsibility for his own part in the bad treatment of Paul and Silas, even though he had not beaten them himself, because he had also treated them as prisoners, be it (partly) unknowingly. 
After all of this, after having explained the Word of God twice, and the washing of their wounds and the baptism, only then was it time to eat food. Perhaps the food could have been eaten during the washing or even during the speaking of the Word, but the latter would have diminished the seriousness of the Word—although the power of the Word is not diminished by a mere presentation, but could be by the intent of the person #biblestudy/questions —and in the former possibility the jailer likely would have wanted to know more about God, even while Paul and Silas were being treated. 

::All things are important, but symbolically, the order shows that the Word of God comes first, one is then filled with love for his fellowmen, he regrets and makes amends, with God first, then one is baptized and then one shares the holy supper with the Body of Christ.:: 

*35 But when it was day, the magistrates sent the police, saying, “Let those men go.” 36 And the jailer reported these words to Paul, saying, “The magistrates have sent to let you go. Therefore come out now and go in peace.”*

Paul was apparently put back in prison after all of this and most likely voluntarily. Paul could have escaped and it would even have been legitimate in my opinion, for he had been arrested and beaten without having done anything wrong. The jailer could have even let them stay at his house, but Paul would have wanted the jailer to see what would follow next. That they voluntarily let themselves be beaten for the Gospel and that the magistrate would apologize, in order to show the jailer the greatness and trustworthiness of God. 

*37 But Paul said to them, “They have beaten us publicly, uncondemned, men who are Roman citizens, and have thrown us into prison; and do they now throw us out secretly? No! Let them come themselves and take us out.”*

This again shows how something that the most efficient path was not chosen for the sake of the Gospel of God (cf. where Paul could have travelled #todo/opzoeken/engels to Troas directly). In this case Paul could have told the police and the magistrates directly that they were Roman citizens but they did not, probably because God told them not to. Paul and Silas trusted God and it was repaid with the conversion of a household. 

Both Paul and Silas had Roman citizenships and could make use of it in this situation. This would not have been possible with Mark who was most likely from Jerusalem since his mother lived there—another reason why it was wise that Mark did not join them, although one could have thought that he, just like Timothy and Luke, could have escaped to Lydia's place. 

*38 The police reported these words to the magistrates, and they were afraid when they heard that they were Roman citizens. 39 So they came and apologized to them. And they took them out and asked them to leave the city. 40 So they went out of the prison and visited Lydia. And when they had seen the brothers, they encouraged them and departed.*

Even after Paul and Silas had been beaten and imprisoned for the night and probably did not get much of sleep after all the evangelizing and baptizing, they were still the ones to encourage the other brothers (I assume they were also encouraging Lydia) who had not been in prison, i.e. Luke and Timothy who were still young and inexperienced then. 
The power of the Holy Spirit is so strong to give one not only physical strength for the beatings, mental strength for the lack of sleep, but also spiritual strength for the healing of the heart and to not hold a grudge against those who persecuted you. 

#biblestudy/devotionals/acts #tags/lgbt #tags/events/pentecost