# Hebrews 2 (LSB)
What is the *reason* that v.1 is referring to? It can only refer to the second part of the previous verse (1:14), namely that the **ministering spirits**—angels—are **sent to render service for the sake of those who will inherit salvation**. If we are those who will inherit salvation, we should pay close attention to what these angels say, for everything they do, is for our sake, and they are serving God. Why, however, does the author emphasize this (by means of the adverb **much** and the comparative adjective **closer**) **lest we drift away**? 
This could mean that there are messages sent by God in a variety of ways, such as circumstances or perhaps even dreams, but if ever an angel tells us something, we should pay much closer attention. If we do not, we might drift away. Now, why is that? We need to realize that man is always on the brink of drifting away. Without God's power of spiritually upholding us (cf. this same term in the first chapter) every day could be our last day as a believer. Our faith is being tested all the time and the only reason we pass the tests is because of God's protection. Sometimes, though, we need more protection. For example, when Joseph found out that Mary was pregnant by another "person", he wanted to "drift away". He was not necessarily going to leave the faith, but he would drift away from his purpose of caring for Mary, raising Jesus and his brothers, etc. 
In this same way, we must pay close attention to what we have heard from angels. Now, the question is what this is then? Who has ever heard angels but the lucky few we hear of every now and then? 1 John 3:11 (and in other places) says that "this is the message you have heard from the beginning". It does not really matter where they have heard this, but it all comes to the same message, namely that we have to believe in the Name of the Son, Jesus Christ, and love one another. 

### Warning Against Neglecting Salvation
**Heb. 2:1**   For this reason we must pay much closer attention to 1what we have heard, lest awe drift away. 

The questions have been answered *why* we must pay closer attention and *what* it is we have heard. The purpose is of course to not **drift away**, but the **reason** why is because the angels are ministering us for our **sake**. But *how* do we pay closer attention? The answer is given in the following verses. 
1. The **word spoken through angels**—assuming that is the Bible—must be **proved unalterable**. Can we prove this? It is every Christian's own responsibility to make sure for himself that there is proof that the God's Word has not changed. As a matter of fact, 1 Peter 3:15 makes clear that one has even to defend the faith, and first of all, one's own belief and faith in the risen Lord and all things related to that. 
2. We should not **neglect so great a salvation**. There are many technical discussions concerning science and faith, about the veracity of a specific doctrine such as *Once Saved, Always Saved* #biblestudy/theology/calvinism/osas and the end-times. But the most important topic of all is that of salvation. I am not even speaking of soteriology here, but the *realization* the we have been *saved*, that God saved us, that Christ *died* for so that we can have life again, as He meant it (cf. John 10:10). If we neglect this part, all other doctrines, whether we are correct by them or not, are of no relevance to us. 
3. We must confirm this **salvation**. The author writes that it was **confirmed** to him by first-hand witnesses who heard it **spoken by the Lord**. (This also bounds the list of possible authorship to someone who has *not* directly heard the Lord speaking.) Our job is to spread what we have heard from them. 
4. We must use the **gifts of the Holy Spirit**. God has given us these gifts to support the testimony of God. For one this is by means of signs and wonders, for example for those who have the gift of healing others, these should do so and spread the gospel along with it, so that the people who see this may believe that what is said is true; For another it is the gift of generosity or lovingkindness with which one shows Jesus through one's works. 

**2** For if the word aspoken through bangels proved 1unalterable, and cevery trespass and disobedience received a just 2dpenalty, **3** ahow will we escape if we neglect so great a bsalvation? 

This is a rhetoric question. It is *not assumed* that **the word spoken through angels proved unalterable, and every trespass and disobedience received a just penalty**, but it has been proven already, through the history of this world, and most specifically as described in the Old Testament, which the Jewish target must have been familiar with. And if this has already been proven, then the answer to the question is clear: we will *not* escape **if we neglect so great a bsalvation**. 
If any Jew should doubt, they can go back to the Old Testament and see where the word of an angel did not come true. I do not know of many examples, but those to Abraham, Lot— concerning the fate of Sodom and Gomorrah—and those to Isaiah came out as said. There is still a part of Isaiah that needs to be fulfilled, but the prophecies up to *at least* Isaiah 53, these have already been fulfilled. And there are those words where the angel is not specifically mentioned, such as in the prophecies of Daniel and Ezekiel and the words spoken to the minor prophets. These words were probably brought by angels as well. 
The doubting Jew can see if any trespass and disobedience has ever *not* received a just penalty from the Lord. If both statements are true then, then it follows that the third one is true as well. We will *especially* not escape His judgment if we read in v.4 that God even provided confirmation and His own testifying. 

That*salvation*, first cspoken by the Lord, was dconfirmed to us by those who heard, **4** God also testifying with them, both by asigns and wonders and by bvarious 1miracles and by 2cgifts of the Holy Spirit daccording to His own will.

This shows how generous God is. He is merciful to us as well. He does not need to prove anythingHebrews 1:1 already says that God provided the prophets for us, Psalm #todo/opzoeken/reference tell of the heavens declaring the glory of God, Romans 1 tells of God's visible glory in creation for all of man, and their conscience, but he has added so much more confirmation for us that He is real, His Law is truth, and His promises are true as well. 

### Jesus, the Author of Salvation

**Heb. 2:5**   For He did not subject to angels 1athe world to come, concerning which we are speaking.

Again the author starts with the word **For**, indicating an *elaboration* on what was said previously. But how do we interpret this elaboration? Normally one would expect a *statement* like 
> "I am the One Who decides what will happen with this world (statement), *for* I have not subjected the world to angels, but to My Son, Jesus. (elaboration)".   
There is no intuitive statement where v.5 is the elaboration, but for the last part of v.4,  namely **God also testifying [...] according to His own will**. So God did this according to His *own* will and no one else's, not for humans or angels. For what He wants to happen with this world is His decision and His alone... **[for] He did not subject to angels the world to come**, but to His Son. 
Does the author need to emphasize so much that it is not the angels that rule the world? Do we not already know this? The target audience, the Hebrews, that is the Jews, did not worship angels (cf. Colossians 2:18), but there were groups in that time that reduced the Messiah to one of the angels, such as the Essenes—also called the Qumran Sect or Qumran Community—to the position of an angel lower than Gabriel. This of course had to be put to rest, once and for all. Hence the citations upon citations that are given in vv.6-8. 

**6** But one has testified asomewhere, saying, 
	“bWHAT IS MAN, THAT YOU REMEMBER HIM? 
	OR THE SON OF MAN, THAT YOU ARE CONCERNED ABOUT HIM?
**7** 	“aYOU HAVE MADE 1HIM FOR A LITTLE WHILE LOWER THAN THE ANGELS; 
	YOU HAVE CROWNED HIM WITH GLORY AND HONOR, 
	2AND HAVE APPOINTED HIM OVER THE WORKS OF YOUR HANDS;
**8** 	aYOU HAVE PUT ALL THINGS IN SUBJECTION UNDER HIS FEET.” 

For in subjecting all things to him, He left nothing that is not subject to him. But now bwe do not yet see all things subjected to him. 

The editors of the LSB interpreted the person referred to by "him" as man, and not as Jesus, although Jesus was man as well. This is indeed true if we look at Genesis 1:28 where man is commanded by God to subdue the Earth and have dominion over all living things. Furthermore the commandments in v.27 was to be fruitful, multiply and fill the Earth. Man has received these simple commandment and is not able to obey these. 
First of all, he does *not* multiply, but *adds*, that is he grows linearly in an additive way. A graph of the growth in number of people over time shows that around 6000 years ago until perhaps a thousand years ago (#todo/opzoeken ) there were at most a couple of million people on Earth. It took thousands of years just to get to one million and only then it started to grow linearly on average, but even then it took a long time just to get to the first billion. There is no clear cut exponent or power to fit this growth curve, and it fits neither a linear nor an exponential curve. This is because the line drops as well, which is because people kept dying because they kept killing each other. 
What were the reasons they killed each other (cf. John 3:11ff)? It was because of evil of course, but in general greed and the lust for money that they did not help each other so that people died of poverty and illness. Of course, hygiene is a factor, but the reason of bad hygiene is first of all neglect of God's commands concerning hygiene, and second of all greed. Because of greed, people dump trash in the rivers from which people drink, or in the sea from which people fish, only to save on costs. Because of poverty people flee to the city to get work, while in the country much less people were struck by hygienic problems and pests, as well as death of women after giving birth #todo/opzoeken/engels kraamdood. While in the city people were crammed up in small spaces, the government nor the rich did anything to better the situations there. This also led to depressing situations where people drank too much alcohol, leaving to even more deaths—not only in their own lives, but also through the influence they have on their surroundings. 
Then what about war? This killed even more people, especially men, and is perhaps the main factor of a decline in growth or perhaps even a decline in population. After #tags/historic events/wwii# the growth of the Jewish population was heavily more than literally decimated. Ten million Jews were killed world-wide #todo/opzoeken out of an original ...

But this is only one commandment, what about filling the Earth? Why did people conglomerate and stayed in big cities instead of populating the rest of the world? Some did, like the Polynesians, but the Americas, for example, were mostly uninhabited until the discovery of it, and still there are vast areas in the desert of Africa, in mountainous areas in Siberia and everywhere else in Asia which are not inhabited, simply because people ignore God's commands. 
Does man think it cannot subdue deserts and mountains or swamps? **He left nothing that is not subject to him.** Literally, nothing. Perhaps inhabiting the moon and #todo/opzoeken/engels leefbaar maken Mars is a bridge too far and a show of pride, but everything on Earth is within our reach. **But now we do not yet see all things subjected to him** and that is because of this pride. Man does not go for these "simple" things. He says there is a shortage of food, but there is more than man could eat, even without genetically modified grains which can grow in areas where rain does not frequently occur. Man can produce enough #todo/opzoeken/engels nitrate to produce fertilizer to make infertile areas fertile again. With all of man's technology this is possible, but in their wisdom they had rather inhabit a planet which no man has reached yet, which has temperatures that are not suited, no water sources—in short, in all of the areas Earth towers over Mars in cost, effectivity and efficiency, and man and men like #tags/famouspeople Elon Musk still want to inhabit Mars. Where is man's logic? It is gone. 	 

**9** But we do see Him who was amade 1for a little while lower than the angels—Jesus, bbecause of the suffering of death ccrowned with glory and honor, so that dby the grace of God He might etaste death ffor everyone.

What I notice here is that in the citations "him" is written with small letters, because this is quoted from Psalm 8 which speaks about man. However, in 1 Corinthians 15:27, where this is quoted again, it writes "Him" with a capital letter, clearly referring to Jesus there. I can understand that this verse is used in a different context as these are two separate books, but in v.9 "Him" refers to Jesus and is written with a capital while two verses before this was not the case. 
The explanation for this is that in the first place v.7 refers to all of man, of which Jesus was one, for a short while. I am not speaking here of the **little while** in v.7, which refers to man's lifespan of approximately 70 years (Psalm 90:10), but of the even shorter while of about 33.5 years that Jesus was on Earth. Just like man, Jesus too was made **lower than the angels**. This does not contradict my and the Bible's earlier statements about Jesus being the authority of all angels. 
One can say that there is a contradiction because one cannot be authoritative over and subject to another at the same time, even for a short while, even if one subject voluntarily. A king who puts down his throne, even for a short while, and gives it to another, might never get his crown back. But Jesus, having given temporal authority over the Earth to the prince of the Earth, that is the Satan—while still ruling, but from heaven—and another kind of authority to the angels, was still in charge, because His Father was in charge. Even though He gave up His position and power, no angel would touch Him because His Father was still in power. Everything Jesus asks or commanded would be done by His Father and the Holy Spirit and this way the Son was lower than the angels and still Lord over the angels at the same time. 

> **Heb. 2:10**   For ait was fitting for Him, bfor whom are all things, and through whom are all things, in bringing many sons to glory, to cperfect the 1dauthor of their salvation through sufferings. **11** For both He who asanctifies and those who bare being sanctified are all cof One; for which reason He is not ashamed to call them dbrothers, **12** saying,   
	“aI WILL RECOUNT YOUR NAME TO MY BROTHERS, 
	IN THE MIDST OF THE ASSEMBLY I WILL SING YOUR PRAISE.”

**Heb. 2:13**   And again, 
	“aI WILL PUT MY TRUST IN HIM.” 

 And again, 
	“bBEHOLD, I AND THE CHILDREN WHOM GOD HAS GIVEN ME.”

**Heb. 2:14**   Therefore, since the children share in 1aflesh and blood, bHe Himself likewise also partook of the same, that cthrough death He might render powerless dhim who had the 2power of death, that is, the devil, **15** and might free those who through afear of death were subject to slavery all their lives. 

The ones who are freed all have something in common, which is that they all **were subject to slavery**. However, they were not forced to be slaved, they had a way out, but the price for that was death. It is like Martin Luther #tags/famouspeople/christian said that no man could be forced to do anything against his own will. Man always has a choice. 
Even slaves of all times have always had a choice. They could run away, but getting caught would cost them their lives or their skin, for they would be flogged severely. However, it was this **fear of death** that caused them this **slavery all their lives**.
Other slaves who saw this punishment would become so frightened that they would not dare to escape. Some would, like Harriet Tubman #tags/famouspeople/christian, who was a black American slave, helping to bring many other slaves to freedom. But she too had to fear the risk of death. However, she did not fear death in the way man fears death, for she was a Christian and had already died and been born again spiritually.
**[Those] who through afear of death were subject to slavery** refers to those who have not died and been born again yet. For those who have died before, know that despite the pain, it brings much more. Those who have studied have the experience of sacrificing time and entertainment, but have gained knowledge. Those who have been in labor have experienced pain like no man has ever felt, but have gained the joy of giving birth to a living being. All of these things can be repeated, but no man has lived through death, except for those who have been resurrected, and these cases are rare.
That is why Christians—who have lived through their spiritual deaths—must testify of their new life in Christ, which is much greater than any life one has as a slave. One could be a master of slaves, like Joseph was the master of the house of Potifar and manager of the prisoners in the king's prison, but that does not live up to life in freedom. 
Not a few have given up hope on ever escaping captivity and slavery. The movie *Shawshank Redemption* (Footnote: It needs to be mentioned that this particular scene and many others as well, I personally see as plagiarized from the movie *Escape from Alcatraz*.) #tags/movies by Stephen King #tags/famouspeople describes a scene where a prisoner does not even want to leave prison, because he fears life outside of prison. 

**16** For assuredly He does not 1give help to angels, but He gives help to the seed of Abraham. 

This is an encouragement for us—man—that even though we have temporarily been placed lower than the angels, eventually salvation is for us and not for them.  

**17** Therefore, He 1had ato be made like His brothers in all things, so that He might bbecome a merciful and faithful chigh priest in dthings pertaining to God, to emake propitiation for the sins of the people. **18** For since He Himself was atempted in that which He has suffered, He is able to come to help those who are tempted.

Jesus has experienced everything we have experienced. Is that true? Literally, as a human, no. He has not gone through every experience in life. But Jesus could read minds and if He could do that, He could also feel other people's feelings. He could empathize with others, but where we can only imagine what another person would feel like, or remember how we felt like when the same thing happened to and think that the other person might feel the same way, Jesus *actually* felt the same feelings. Even more so, He felt the same shame, even though He was sinless. 
This is a huge burden to bear. A preacher once said that Jesus' suffering did not start at the Via Dolorosa (Footnote: This is the road that Jesus walked between the place of His trial and the judgment and the cross at Golgotha. There is a great deal of speculation concerning where these places exactly or even *actually* are. 
#todo/nogaftemaken Create a separate document for this. 
) but at His incarnation. For Jesus lived every day as a human being during His life on Earth, and had to suffer in ways we cannot imagine. Jesus did not need air in Heaven, but on Earth He had to breathe in and out every second. If Jesus had the purest of air in Heaven He would now have filthy air here. But the real burden, perhaps, is to feel all the feelings of man. He lived with it and He could "easily" bear the burden, for He is God. This is not exactly like where Henry Cavill #tags/famouspeople/actors played #tags/movies Superman and suffered tremendously because he heard and felt all of humanity's feelings, next to all of the sound and light, which were too big and many stimuli. For Jesus this was easier to bear, because He is more powerful than Superman of course, but still, "easy" is only relative, for compared to Heaven, Earth would still be like hell. 

#biblestudy/devotionals/hebrews #tags/bible/hebrews