# Acts 7 (ESV) 
**Stephen's Speech** 
*1 And the high priest said, “Are these things so?”* 

Instead of answering the high priest blandly—which would not have an effect, Stephen must have known, because Jesus too was punished for even worse accusations and the testimonial record was contradictory, yet still they killed him—Stephen goes for an alternate way of inductive rhetoric. Instead of explaining his innocence he goes on to explain to the guilt of the Israelites. The fact that they get enraged by this, while only stating facts, already proves they are very sensitive when it comes their self honor. It also proves they are very weak at self relativizing and self knowledge. 

*2 And Stephen said:* 
*“Brothers and fathers, hear me. The God of glory appeared to our father Abraham when he was in Mesopotamia, before he lived in Haran, 3 and said to him, Go out from your land and from your kindred and go into the land that I will show you.’ 4 Then he went out from the land of the Chaldeans and lived in Haran. And after his father died, God removed him from there into this land in which you are now living. 5 Yet he gave him no inheritance in it, not even a foot's length, but promised to give it to him as a possession and to his offspring after him, though he had no child. 6 And God spoke to this effect—that his offspring would be sojourners in a land belonging to others, who would enslave them and afflict them four hundred years. 7 ‘But I will judge the nation that they serve,’ said God, ‘and after that they shall come out and worship me in this place.’ 8 And he gave him the covenant of circumcision. And so Abraham became the father of Isaac, and circumcised him on the eighth day, and Isaac became the father of Jacob, and Jacob of the twelve patriarchs.* 
*9 “And the patriarchs, jealous of Joseph, sold him into Egypt; but God was with him 10 and rescued him out of all his afflictions and gave him favor and wisdom before Pharaoh, king of Egypt, who made him ruler over Egypt and over all his household. 11 Now there came a famine throughout all Egypt and Canaan, and great affliction, and our fathers could find no food. 12 But when Jacob heard that there was grain in Egypt, he sent out our fathers on their first visit. 13 And on the second visit Joseph made himself known to his brothers, and Joseph's family became known to Pharaoh. 14 And Joseph sent and summoned Jacob his father and all his kindred, seventy-five persons in all. 15 And Jacob went down into Egypt, and he died, he and our fathers, 16 and they were carried back to Shechem and laid in the tomb that Abraham had bought for a sum of silver from the sons of Hamor in Shechem.* 
*17 “But as the time of the promise drew near, which God had granted to Abraham, the people increased and multiplied in Egypt 18 until there arose over Egypt another king who did not know Joseph. 19 He dealt shrewdly with our ::race:: and forced our fathers to expose their infants, so that they would not be kept alive. 20 At this time Moses was born; and he was beautiful in God's sight. And he was brought up for three months in his father's house, 21 and when he was exposed, Pharaoh's daughter adopted him and brought him up as her own son. 22 And Moses was instructed in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, and he was mighty in his words and deeds.* 
*23 “When he was forty years old, it came into his heart to visit his brothers, the children of Israel. 24 And seeing one of them being wronged, he defended the oppressed man and avenged him by striking down the Egyptian. 25 ::He supposed that his brothers would understand that God was giving them salvation by his hand::, but they did not understand. 26 And on the following day he appeared to them as they were quarreling and tried to reconcile them, saying, ‘Men, you are brothers. Why do you wrong each other?’ 27 But the man who was wronging his neighbor thrust him aside, saying, Who made you a ruler and a judge over us? 28 Do you want to kill me as you killed the Egyptian yesterday?’ 29 At this retort Moses fled and became an exile in the land of Midian, where he became the father of two sons.* 

The Israelites are being wronged now by the Palestinians and God struck them down in the Six-Day War around 1960 #tags/historic events# #tags/country/israel a few times more before and after that. Even now He still protects their country with the best missiles and iron dome-technology in the world, but some in Israel itself, and many Jews outside of Israel, are against this. They care so much about those who struck them down that they do not even mind their own people from being struck down. Why is that? Should we not care more about our own people? 
The Israelite who was angry at Moses was so because he felt judged by Moses and he wanted to be the judge of his own actions, or in other words, he wanted to be God Himself. In this same way the Jews are happy they have fled from Judaism and are not being judged by God anymore but that they can judge their own life. 
The Israelites did not judge between Egypt and Israelites, however, they probably would have judged in favor of the former given the right circumstances. We have seen Jews making wrong decisions and being on the wrong side for literally millennia. Many Jews were on the side of fascism when Mussolini initiated it, before he closed a deal with Hitler to incorporate Nazism. #tags/historic events/wwii# Long before the Second World War, however, the Rothschilds already were on the wrong side, financing wars and perhaps they even financed the Germans in exterminating the Jews as well the Allies who saved them. 
Jesus had come to destroy the evil. The Satan's followers will follow the same fate at the end-time. But instead of following Jesus, the Jews tell the same thing as the Israelites did 1500 years earlier: "Who is Jesus to judge them?" The Israelites do not want to be judged, not even by one who saves them. Moses saved them and Jesus saved them, some of the kings saved them, only when the king was loyal to God—but still the Israelites were so stubborn. It seems they are even more stubborn than other peoples and you might wonder about why God would have chosen this people as His children. It is all because of Abraham that God made this promise, that is what the Israelites need to realize: even though it had been more than 2000 years when Abraham met God, God is still faithful because of Abraham's faith, and the only reason he kept them alive is because His servant Moses intervened. 
Now the only reason we are being alive is because His servant Jesus intervened for us, like Moses did for the Israelites. But whereas Moses was able to kneel down so that God could postpone His punishment, Jesus could not ask for postponement for He is the last prophet and now all the Israelites would suffer for their own deeds and virtually for those of their forefathers as well. 

*30 “Now when forty years had passed, an angel appeared to him in the wilderness of Mount Sinai, in a flame of fire in a bush. 31 When Moses saw it, he was amazed at the sight, and as he drew near to look, there came the voice of the Lord: 32 I am the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham and of Isaac and of Jacob.’ And Moses trembled and did not dare to look. 33 Then the Lord said to him, Take off the sandals from your feet, for the place where you are standing is holy ground.* 

The voice with which God spoke was not His' but an angel's, perhaps Gabriel's. It is different from when Gabriel spoke to Mary where he clearly spoke on behalf of God. Here God is using an angel's voice, most likely because God's voice is too holy for to even hear and because He does not speak in a language we can understand. 
What is noticeable is that God's holiness is too great for our perceptory #todo/opzoeken/engels senses. If Moses were to see the fullness of God, He would die; when ... #todo/opzoeken/engels touched the Ark, he died. The Bible does not speak of tasting or smelling, but we can assume that these too are too holy for us to perceive. If Aaron's sons died by lighting a wrong kind of fire, then how can we prevent death on our sides? 
What is also noticeable is that the presence of God's voice—not the presence of God Himself, for He is always present everywhere—the manifestation of Himself *through* His voice, creates holiness in the area around it. Christians are to manifest this holiness as well. We are supposed to live such a holy life that others are infected by it and change their lives as well. This costs a lifetime for some to convert only one person, while God, while only manifesting His voice, and probably holding Himself in at the same time, can create an aura of holiness around Him where everything gets destroyed which is not holy. In fact Moses should have been destroyed, but it was of God's mercy that he was not. 
What is strange is that Moses was told to take off his shoes. Now why would shoes be more unclean than the soles of one's feet? Here we see a deviation from the Buddhist religion and Japanese traditions. Buddhists think of one's feet as unholy, because it touches the dirt, and the Japanese, perhaps for the same reason, but also because of the sweat and stains it leaves behind on polished surfaces, traditionally wear clean slippers at home. You will never see a traditional man or woman without his slippers at home. 
Rationally, one would think that because of our unholiness we should separate ourselves with God, through a layer of leather, which is the sandal. Just like the Ark was not touched by hands, but by gold-plated sticks #todo/opzoeken/engels and Moses eyes were shielded off by a rock from which he looked or pierced to block most of the holiness coming from God's back. 
In this case, however, God allowed him to come near Him when one still covers himself it wold be an insult to God. That is why men should not hide themselves under a cap or hat during worship for God is above them, and when the ground is holy people should not cover themselves from the bottom, which is by shoes. When God allows us to near Him we must give ourselves to Him, fully uncovered on all sides. 

*34 I have surely seen the affliction of my people who are in Egypt, and have heard their groaning, and I have come down to deliver them. And now come, I will send you to Egypt.’* 
*35 “This Moses, whom they rejected, saying, ‘Who made you a ruler and a judge?’—this man God sent as both ruler and redeemer by the hand of the angel who appeared to him in the bush. 36 This man led them out, performing wonders and signs in Egypt and at the Red Sea and in the wilderness for forty years. 37 This is the Moses who said to the Israelites, ‘God will raise up for you a prophet like me from your brothers.’ 38 This is the one who was in the congregation in the wilderness with the angel who spoke to him at Mount Sinai, and with our fathers. He received living oracles to give to us. 39 Our fathers refused to obey him, but thrust him aside, and in their hearts they turned to Egypt, 40 saying to Aaron, Make for us gods who will go before us. As for this Moses who led us out from the land of Egypt, we do not know what has become of him.’ 41 And they made a calf in those days, and offered a sacrifice to the idol and were rejoicing in the works of their hands. 42 But God turned away and gave them over to worship the ::host of heaven::, as it is written in the book of the prophets:* #todo/opzoeken 
*“‘Did you bring to me slain beasts and sacrifices,* 
*during the forty years in the wilderness, O house of Israel?* 
*43 You took up the tent of Moloch* 
*and the star of your god Rephan,* 
*the images that you made to worship;* 
*and I will send you into exile beyond Babylon.’* 
*44 “Our fathers had the tent of witness in the wilderness, just as he who spoke to Moses directed him to make it, according to the pattern that he had seen. 45 Our fathers in turn brought it in with Joshua when they dispossessed the nations that God drove out before our fathers. So it was until the days of David, 46 who found favor in the sight of God and asked to find a dwelling place for the God of Jacob. 47 But it was Solomon who built a house for him. 48 Yet the Most High does not dwell in houses made by hands, as the prophet says,* 
*49 “‘Heaven is my throne,* 
*and the earth is my footstool.* 
*What kind of house will you build for me, says the Lord,* 
*or what is the place of my rest?* 
*50 Did not my hand make all these things?’* 
*51 “You stiff-necked people, uncircumcised in heart and ears, you always resist the Holy Spirit. As your fathers did, so do you. 52 Which of the prophets did your fathers not persecute? And they killed those who announced beforehand the coming of the Righteous One, whom you have now betrayed and murdered, 53 you who received the law as delivered by angels and did not keep it.”* 

I am trying to understand the argument Stephen is using. Why would he start all the way from Abraham, reflect on Moses most, linger at David but skip through the prophets while the latter are in fact the main argument Stephen is bringing? After all, it is the prophets the Israelites killed and the Holy Spirit they ignored.
Actually, Stephen starts with the argument of resisting the Holy Spirit, saying the Israelites are uncircumcised in hearts and ears, meaning that they do not feel God nor hear Him. Stephen shows this by telling the court about the biggest one of the first and biggest promises ever, which is that they would spend a period of 400 years in Egypt, but be relieved then. 
Now Moses came and instead of seeing him as their savior, they rejected him with a cynical #todo/opzoeken/engels opmerking comment: "Who made you ruler and judge?"—while Moses knew himself that God was giving them salvation through him, Acts 7:25 explains: 
>  *He supposed that his brothers would understand that God was giving them salvation by his hand, but they did not understand.*  
So here the Israelites showed their ignorance of the promise made to Abraham—although I doubt that—and their insensitivity to the Holy Spirit, for if they were sensitive, they would have known that Moses was there to lead them. 
Concerning this promise, to which the people had been looking forward to for 400 years, there is another thing which shows the Israelites' uncircumcised hearts and ears: they wanted to return to Egypt. 
Did they not hear that God would free us from Egypt? Did they have no gratitude? They had heard for sure, they had even seen it after all the miracles that were done, but their heart was uncircumcised, it did not belong to the Lord but to their own deities. 
This is what Stephen is trying to explain. Even though they were in the caravan, and eventually they were even in the promised land, their hearts and ears were still uncircumcised. 
they preferred dead oracles instead of living oracles 

* The promise
* The miracles

**The Stoning of Stephen** 
*54 Now when they heard these things they were enraged, and they ground their teeth at him. 55 But he, full of the Holy Spirit, gazed into heaven and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God. 56 And he said, “Behold, I see the heavens opened, and the Son of Man standing at the right hand of God.” 57 But they cried out with a loud voice and stopped their ears and rushed together at him. 58 Then they cast him out of the city and stoned him. And the witnesses laid down their garments at the feet of a young man named Saul. 59 And as they were stoning Stephen, he called out, “Lord Jesus, receive my spirit.” 60 And falling to his knees he cried out with a loud voice, “Lord, do not hold this sin against them.” And when he had said this, he fell asleep.* 

#biblestudy/devotionals/acts 
