# Acts 18 (ESV) 
***Paul in Corinth***
*1 After this Paul left Athens and went to Corinth. 2 And he found a Jew named Aquila, a native of Pontus, recently come from Italy with his wife Priscilla, because ::Claudius:: had commanded all the Jews to leave Rome. And he went to see them, 3 and because he was of the ::same trade:: he stayed with them and worked, for they were tentmakers by trade.*

How many coincidence are there in this part? Aquila and Priscilla were both Jewish, there were both in Corinth, at the same time, and they were tentmakers by trade, which is probably how they met or perhaps they met in the synagogue. 
In any case, God works through planning, which in the eyes of man seems like coincidence. Not only had God *timed* things exactly right, but he also finds the right *person*, Aquila, a Jew, and of the right *trade*, which might have helped Paul to save a lot of time in making tents, for he would not have to sell them anymore if Aquila helped selling them. Perhaps he also did not need to buy new tools, if Aquila had them available for him, and of course, it would be good company for Paul, not only socially, but also a methodically so that he could disciple Aquila on Christianity during work. 

*4 And he reasoned in the synagogue every Sabbath, and tried to persuade Jews and Greeks.*

So Paul worked as a tentmaker #todo/opzoeken  day and night? See Corinthians 
and even on the Sabbath, but not as a tentmaker but as an missionary. Would that not be working too hard and disobeying the Sabbath? No, for missionaries the Sabbath is the day when all Jews gather in the synagogue. For Christians the mission field is like a doctor working among the sick, which is even allowed to be done on Sabbath, for Jesus said so and healed a sick person. 
Furthermore, if Paul had hard physical work in making tents every day, then one full day of speaking in the synagogues would be his pleasure and a good change of work. 
But still, it does not say that the Sabbath has been abolished by  Christianity. 

*5 When Silas and Timothy ::arrived:: from Macedonia, Paul was occupied with the word, testifying to the Jews that the Christ was Jesus.*

Is it a coincidence again that just when they arrived, Paul was ready to give up on the Corinthians? Was he going to give up on them, or was he only expressing his feelings? Or was he merely going to go to another neighborhood? #todo/nogaftemaken 

*6 And when they opposed and reviled him, he shook out his garments and said to them, “Your blood be on your own heads! I am innocent. From now on I will go to the Gentiles.” 7 And he left there and went to the house of a man named Titius Justus, a worshiper of God. His house was next door to the synagogue. 8 Crispus, the ruler of the synagogue, believed in the Lord, together with his entire household. And many of the Corinthians hearing Paul believed and were baptized. 9 And the Lord said to Paul one night in a vision, “Do not be afraid, ::but go on speaking and do not be silent::, 10 for I am with you, and no one will attack you to harm you, for I have many in this city who are my people.” 11 And he stayed a year and six months, teaching the word of God among them.*

The Lord works here through pressure, relief and then a personal revelation. This is  I have experienced in my own life as well. Things get hard and after this period I can see things changing, but it is the Word of God (his *rhema*) which makes everything clear and confirms that things are changing because of *His work* and also to confirm that I am on the right track. #todo/nogaftemaken 
Fortunately #todo Paul has many people, even the ruler of the synagogue, believing in the Lord together with his entire household. This might have given Paul extra encouragement, that is always welcome for the men and missionaries of God.

Despite his furious statement in verse 6 he still stayed because of God's vision. From the reading it seemed like Paul was going to leave and shake the dust from his feet, but that the Lord stopped him in a vision. Would Paul's anger have been such fierce that the Holy Spirit's voice was not even enough to pierce through God's anger? If so, God's mercy is great enough to send him a vision to stop him. 
God has shown the greatness of His mercy when He stopped Balaam. Perhaps God already knew that a vision would not suffice, so He did not even use it, but had to go for something more drastic: a talking donkey! Or perhaps God did use the vision, which was the angel with the sword, but Balaam in his blindness could not see it, hence the more drastic measure. 

*12 But when Gallio was proconsul of Achaia, the Jews made a united attack on Paul and brought him before the tribunal, 13 saying, “This man is persuading people to worship God contrary to the law.” 14 But when Paul was ::about to open his mouth::, Gallio said to the Jews,*

God is right on time, and just like in other occasions in the Bible and in real life, He is there the last minute—in this case even in the very last second before Paul wanted to speak. Why would God do this at this time and not before it? For one, in my opinion the memory of God's work is much greater if God intervenes at the last moment or when you least expect it. Most people lose hope in the last few minutes when all is lost. A football match where one team is three points behind cannot be won within 15 minutes, let alone three. But life is not a football match and God is able to change things at the very last second. Secondly, life is also not a football match in the sense that the match is over when the time has run out. As long as life continues, we will stay in this match which has already been decided and won by God. These *events* then are like parts of a football match, of which there are many, and one learns from these events so that he is better prepared the next time. 

*“If it were a matter of wrongdoing or vicious crime, O Jews, I would have reason to accept your complaint. 15 But since it is a matter of questions about words and names and your own law, see to it yourselves. I refuse to be a judge of these things.” 16 And he drove them from the tribunal.*

Is not the Left constantly complaining about Trump's words as if these are vicious crimes and insults towards, for example, minority groups? If only we had someone like Gallio, an objective judge, who would see the difference between actual complaints and the Left's tricks to remove Trump from office as well as anyone he appoints, such as the last two Supreme Justices, Brett Kavanaugh and Amy Coney Barrett #todo/opzoeken did this happen to Neil Gorsuch as well? #tags/politics
then these cases would have been dismissed.
Something is definitely wrong with the judicial system, as Steve Cioccolanti #tags/famouspeople/christian has already pointed out, the judges are committing adultery with the people of the Left. This is why all of the cases brought forward by the Left, from wildly unfounded accusations against Brett Kavanaugh of sexual assault to accusations of President Trump colluding with the Russians to hack the voting system so that Hillary Clinton would lose, were all taken seriously—too seriously in my perspective. 

*17 And they all seized ::Sosthenes::, the ruler of the synagogue, and beat him in front of the tribunal. But Gallio paid no attention to any of this.*

One day I expect this to happen in the politics of the United States and the Netherlands. Someone needs to be thrown before the train and if it is not a Republican, it will be someone from their own party. When that happens, just like Gallio refused to judge, unless it was a vicious crime, the Leftist judges will refuse to judge that case seriously, although in this case it *would* be a vicious crime when someone is getting beaten.

Sosthenes would later on become a Christian (see 1 Corinthians 1:1). How striking it is to see the one who was presenting the case to the proconsul become a Christian. The biggest enemies of Christ can become his friends when they see the truth. 
It is said that there are as many Muslims converting to Christianity as the other way around. I do not think that is true, but even if it were, are those "Christians" who convert to Islam as hostile as the Muslims were towards Christianity? Yes, there are a few, but I do not think any of them were intellectually apologetic. #tags/religion/islam In the Netherlands there are two politicians, Arnoud van Doorn and Joram van Klaveren, who both were members of the PVV, which is translated the *Party of Freedom*, which had a strong emphasis on letting Muslims settle in the Netherlands. It is too suspicious that two Dutch politicians convert to Islam. This has never happened before (as far as I know) and now within a relatively short period this happened *twice* and both within *the same party* and above all this happened in an *anti-Islam* party. Something corrupt must have happened here. I think these two party members have been bribed. 
Van Doorn has also become president of the *European Dawah Foundation*. How can a former opponent of Islam become president of this foundation? At the least this foundation should have waited and tested this person a little bit more. 
What is most noticeable to me is that the two politicians do not say what made them convert to Islam. They only say that they saw the truth. There is nothing apologetic about it, let alone intellectual.
Back to Sosthenes, he probably saw the truth because his own party turned against him. He saw that the people who were against Paul were overwhelmed by emotions and stirred up by the crowd and were either acting under group pressure or were brainlessly joining in. Many from the Left, who have the wits, have left the Left as well. I have previously mentioned #tags/famouspeople political commentator Dave Rubin who even wrote a book #tags/books *Why I left the Left* and is now being ousted by the Left as ... #todo/opzoeken  and was even prevented to speak, while being a pro-life gay. Another example is Ruby Rose #tags/famouspeople who plays the *Batwoman* in the eponymous 2019 TV series, who has openly identified as being gay since she was 12, but which  "not enough" according to Social Justice Warriors. 
These events would make some people think that the Left is not an objectively good party or group to belong to and that maybe the Right people are the good ones. Unfortunately, this fact does not enter their thick skulls. Fortunately though, Sosthenes did realize this and became a member of the party of the Christians.

***Paul Returns to Antioch***
*18 After this, Paul stayed many days longer and then took leave of the brothers and set sail for Syria, and with him Priscilla and Aquila.*

So Paul left Luke, Timothy and Silas in Corinth and only took Aquila and Priscilla with him. 

*At Cenchreae he had cut his hair, for he was under a ::vow::. 19 And they came to Ephesus, and he left ::them:: there, but he himself went into the synagogue and reasoned with the Jews. 20 When they asked him to stay for a longer period, he declined. 21 But on taking leave of them he said, “I will return to you if God wills,” and he set sail from Ephesus.*

Priscilla and Aquila were left there, while Paul went in the synagogue himself. Why would that be? One reason could be that Paul wanted to protect them, also because they were not missionaries like Silas. Also because Priscilla was a woman, it would have been more difficult for her to enter the synagogue together with Paul and it would have been better then to leave Aquila with her. 
Note that this was the first time they had arrived in Ephesus. Previously Paul had been expelled from every city he had visited. Two things had changed during the mission. Before Athens, in Berea, Paul decided to go alone first to scout whether the situation was safe, and in Corinth he presumably nearly gave up and had to be convicted and motivated by the Lord to continue. So perhaps his companions were left behind so that Paul could scout the situation first and see the potential for Evangelization and the danger within the synagogue. However, this would not slightly contradict what would happen next, which is the Jews' openness and invitation to stay longer, which Paul then refuses. The message seemed to have been received at least neutrally and likely positively, but still he declined to stay there. Why would Paul decline this opportunity?
There are two reasons possible for this, implicitly mentioned in verse 20, as to why Paul only made contact without the intention to stay. First, Paul had already determined to set sail for Syria and the cities he visited were likely merely resting places for the crew. We can see that his upcoming city was Caesarea Maritima in Israel and both the *KJV* and the Dutch *HSV* translations tell us that Paul wanted to attend a *feast* in Jerusalem (it is unknown which one that is), and thus did not spend more time in the harbor cities and islands than necessary. Luke perhaps thought his consequent stops were not worth mentioning or Paul did not spent a relevant amount of time there. Also, it is very likely that Paul did spend whatever time he had on his hands by visiting the synagogues and spreading Gospel, just like he did in Ephesus, but let this companions prepare food and other things for the continuation of their journey in order to save time. 
So the first reason declined the Jews' invitation is that Paul wanted to make haste because he had to attend a feast. The second reason is similar, Paul had to go to Jerusalem not only because of this feast, but also because he had to present his hair, which he had shaved off in Cenchreae, at the temple within 30 days, which was part of the ending of the Nazirite vow. 

*22 When he had landed at Caesarea, he went up and greeted the church, and then went down to Antioch. 23 After spending some time there, he departed and went from one place to the next through the region of Galatia and Phrygia, strengthening all the disciples.*

***Apollos Speaks Boldly in Ephesus***
*24 Now a Jew named Apollos, a native of Alexandria, came to Ephesus. He was an eloquent man, competent in the Scriptures. 25 He had been instructed in the way of the Lord. And being fervent in spirit, he spoke and taught accurately the things concerning Jesus, though he knew only the baptism of John. 26 He began to speak boldly in the synagogue, but when Priscilla and Aquila heard him, they ::took him aside:: and explained to him the way of God more accurately.*

Aquila and Priscilla were wise in taking him *aside*, especially because he was a brother in Christ, instead of correcting or teaching him in front of others, to save his face and reputation. 
Perhaps Apollos had to make a very big correction or addition to what he said previously and this could damage his seriously credibility, if he would say one thing today and another thing the next day—even though it was logically consistent, for John that Baptist's message did not contradict Christ's.

*27 And when he wished to cross to ::Achaia::, the brothers encouraged him and wrote to the disciples to welcome him. When he arrived, he greatly helped those who through grace had believed, 28 for he powerfully refuted the Jews in public, showing by the Scriptures that the Christ was Jesus.*

It is noteworthy to see that Apollos is mentioned by Luke, almost as if he knew that one day Paul would mention Apollos in one of his letters, so that the reader of this book—Theophilus, but us as well—would understand where this Apollos came from and by whom he was instructed. 
Luke would have known about the epistles of Paul, I presume, as he was with him all the time on his missions except on a few occasions, but the copies of his letters must have passed through Luke's hands. 
Luke and Acts were written before Paul's death and before 70 AD and thus after Paul had written his epistles, so Luke could have read his letters and saw the reference to Apollos and then thought that he had to include it in his book of Acts so that things would be more clear for Theophilus, but that is quite far fetched, even for a man as smart as Luke. It is the Holy Spirit Who inspired Luke to add this part to the book so that we, readers of another age, would be able to understand the relations a little. 

This part also seems to give extra credits to Aquila and Priscilla to show us what they were capable of and that they were more than simple travel companions, but also were simple people, tentmakers, who put their whole life in service of God, just like some missionary couples have done, such as Adoniram and Ashley Judson, and partly Jim and Elisabeth Elliot. #tags/famouspeople/christian 


#biblestudy/devotionals/acts
