# Acts 9 (ESV) (MBP notes nog toevoegen)
**The Conversion of Saul**
*1 But Saul, still breathing threats and murder against the disciples of the Lord, went to the high priest 2 and asked him for letters to the synagogues at Damascus, so that if he found any belonging to the Way, men or women, he might bring them bound to Jerusalem. 3 Now as he went on his way, he approached Damascus, and suddenly a light from heaven shone around him. 4 And falling to the ground, he heard a voice saying to him, “Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me?” 5 And he said, “Who are you, Lord?” And he said, “I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting. 6 But rise and enter the city, and you will be told what you are to do.” 7 The men who were traveling with him stood speechless, hearing the voice but seeing no one. 8 Saul rose from the ground, and although his eyes were opened, he saw nothing. So they led him by the hand and brought him into Damascus. 9 And for three days he was without sight, and neither ate nor drank.*

This is such a short part. Only nine verses, read in less than a minute, but it describes the complete belief and conversion of Paul. The appearance of light—and not merely light, I suppose, but an aura must have been around it—was sufficient for him to know it was God talking. The words of Jesus were sufficient for Him to know his wrongdoing. 
Now would this have worked on one like Richard Dawkins who said that even God's booming voice now would be discredited as merely a hallucination *a priori*? Perhaps, but I doubt God would even try, unless He could use him like He used #tags/famouspeople Sir William Ramsay, the famed archeologist and he has been much more successful in the field of science, both in the secular and Christian category, than Dawkins has. 
As a matter of fact it seems like all those Christian scientists that God propels to fame are world-known. Take for example Isaac Newton, James Tour (world-famous expert on nano-technology and molecular biology) Sir Allen Livingstone and even sportsmen such as #todo/opzoeken  Chariots of Fire #tags/movies
#todo/opzoeken relationship between tour and Cees Dekker
Back to the main line, whether this would have worked on Dawkins is not the question, it worked on Saul. Perhaps it was because Saul was already susceptible and a true believer of God, although being taught wrongly either by Gamaliel about Christians, or—if he had already graduated by the time Jesus Christ came into the picture—he came to wrong conclusion and did not do his research correctly (or he did not do any research at all, but that seems very unlikely given his character and elaborate motivation and reasoning for Christ's death and resurrection from the Old Testament sources). The former does not seem to be true, as have already read that it was Gamaliel who proposed not to persecute the Christians and let time test the truth. Another reason for Saul's conviction of God's presence and in return his conviction of his sin, could also be that God's power was overwhelming and would make any hardheaded unbeliever, including Dawkins, a believer in and fearer of God, although conviction of their own sins could only come by the Holy Spirit for those whom God has chosen. 
The first reason seems to true. In the rest of the New Testament we see that Saul's intentions had been pure, even though they required brutal punishments for Christians and that alone would have been a lack of love for humanity and a #todo/opzoeken/engels  overtreding of freedom of religion, which of course would not be present in a theocracy. Then again, Saul did not have the Holy Spirit and he probably did not feel compassion for Christian, but only a religious zeal for keeping the Law, which in theory, for the most part, he did—except, as said, the "loving your neighbor as yourself"-part #todo/opzoeken and the "walking humbly before God"-part (cf. Micah 6:8) which he forgot. 
Saul knew instantaneously that the light was God. Whether he fell and landed on the ground, or he deliberately knelt down to the ground and perhaps even prostrated himself, is not sure, but it seems like he did not even dare look up. Because he knew it was God, like Elijah and Isaiah, he did not dare look at God's face, and so I assume he only looked at the ground. 
The people around him saw no one. Whether the saw the light was not clear, but they did hear the voice. The fact they did not kneel down is peculiar at best, for I would expect that Jewish people, even those who had not studied the Law, would know that when royalty appears, one has to kneel down. So apparently, unlike Saul, they did not know the voice was from God. 
Saul's question "Who are You, Lord?" should not be interpreted as "Who are you, are you God?". But if it is not interpreted in that way, what did Paul mean then if he already addresses the speaker as Lord?

On verse 9: 
This part shows Saul's true repentance. He realizes he did something wrong and as sensitive as he was, he could not even eat. This might be an explanation. It could also be that he, like Martin Luther #tags/famouspeople #todo/opzoeken/engels zelfkastijding chastized himself in order to repay for the crimes he did. Martin Luther realized his own sins and repented for it, but he did not realize the atoning power of Jesus Christ. For Paul this must have been unclear as well, but in his solitude of the following two or three years, where he was taught by Jesus Christ Himself, #todo/opzoeken where proof that he was away for two years, and where that Christ taught him Personally?  
he learned the deeper meaning of this in such a way that he could later in explain this better, or so we think, than the other disciples.

*10 Now there was a disciple at Damascus named Ananias. The Lord said to him in a vision, “Ananias.” And he said, “Here I am, Lord.” 11 And the Lord said to him, “Rise and go to the street called Straight, and at the house of Judas look for a man of Tarsus named Saul, for behold, he is praying, 12 and he has seen in a vision a man named Ananias come in and lay his hands on him so that he might regain his sight.”*

Would the fact that God chose someone from Tarsus have anything to do with the fact that Jonah went to Tarsus to escape God? God called a God-fearing prophet, but who was not strict enough with God's command, who tried to escape to Tarsus.  
This time God called a God-fearing man who was too strict with God's command, who came from Tarsus.  
God had to teach the one about mercy, and the other about grace.  

*13 But Ananias answered, “Lord, I have heard from many about this man, how much evil he has done to your saints at Jerusalem. 14 And here he has authority from the chief priests to bind all who call on your name.” 15 But the Lord said to him, “Go, for he is a chosen instrument of mine to carry my name before the Gentiles and kings and the children of Israel. 16 For I will show him how much he must suffer for the sake of my name.”*

One goal was to make Paul suffer. The amount of pain Saul has caused Christians must had to be retributed even though he was although a believer. However, I believe that this was not paid in full, for no man could handle that and stay alive, and so the punishment that Paul received for all the killing of Christians, even though this had been for a mere few weeks or months, it seems, was more than enough to let Paul suffer a lifetime of the consequences of his sin, yet Paul received only a part of this punishment and he is grateful and satisfied in each and every circumstance (cf. Philippians 4:11). 
This shows that if those who are really with God and living for God, while suffering a great deal, can be more joyful than most of us, than how much more joy can we have if we do not suffer in this degree as Paul?  
This is not a valid argument, because it is through suffering that one gets to know God better and then become more joyful and receiving a peace of mind. But it does show that we should appreciate more the lack of suffering we have and become more satisfied with what we do have.  

*17 So Ananias departed and entered the house. And laying his hands on him he said, “Brother Saul, the Lord Jesus who appeared to you on the road by which you came has sent me so that you may regain your sight and be filled with the Holy Spirit.” 18 And immediately something like scales fell from his eyes, and he regained his sight. Then he rose and was baptized; 19 and taking food, he was strengthened.*

Before even being explained anything he was baptized. Now we can assume that he at least heard the Gospel before wanting to be baptized, but receiving the Holy Spirit Himself should be enough conviction for one to get baptized.  

**Saul Proclaims Jesus in Synagogues** 
*For some days he was with the disciples at Damascus. And immediately he proclaimed Jesus in the synagogues, saying, “He is the Son of God.” And all who heard him were amazed and said, “Is not this the man who made havoc in Jerusalem of those who called upon this name? And has he not come here for this purpose, to bring them bound before the chief priests?” But Saul increased all the more in strength, and confounded the Jews who lived in Damascus by proving that Jesus was the Christ.* 

**Saul Escapes from Damascus**
*When many days had passed, the Jews plotted to kill him, but their plot became known to Saul. They were watching the gates day and night in order to kill him, but his disciples took him by night and let him down through an opening in the wall, lowering him in a basket.* 

This may be the first time that Paul had to escape, but it would not be the last time. A few verses later he will escape from Jerusalem and in later chapters he will do so again.

**Saul Proclaims Jesus in Synagogues**
*For some days he was with the disciples at Damascus. 20 And immediately he proclaimed Jesus in the synagogues, saying, “He is the Son of God.” 21 And all who heard him were amazed and said, “Is not this the man who made havoc in Jerusalem of those who called upon this name? And has he not come here for this purpose, to bring them bound before the chief priests?” 22 But Saul increased all the more in strength, and confounded the Jews who lived in Damascus by proving that Jesus was the Christ.*

**Saul Escapes from Damascus**
*23 When many days had passed, the Jews plotted to kill him, 24 but their plot became known to Saul. They were watching the gates day and night in order to kill him, 25 but his disciples took him by night and let him down through an opening in the wall, lowering him in a basket.*

**Saul in Jerusalem**
*26 And when he had come to Jerusalem, he attempted to join the disciples. And they were all afraid of him, for they did not believe that he was a disciple. 27 But Barnabas took him and brought him to the apostles and declared to them how on the road he had seen the Lord, who spoke to him, and how at Damascus he had preached boldly in the name of Jesus. 28 So he went in and out among them at Jerusalem, preaching boldly in the name of the Lord. 29 And he spoke and disputed against the Hellenists.*

Again, the Hellenists show up. First they stir up rebellion, then they kill Stephen and now they are trying to kill Paul as well.

*But they were seeking to kill him. 30 And when the brothers learned this, they brought him down to Caesarea and sent him off to Tarsus.*
*31 So the church throughout all Judea and Galilee and Samaria had peace and was being built up.*

It is peace that builds up the church, and the fear of the Lord and comfort of the Holy Spirit that provides multiplication.  
Now one might think: "Of course it is peace that builds up a church. For sure unrest could not." but alas, in reality there have been so many splits in churches for the sake of building up the church through a multiplication of denominations, and though some churches may have a better theology than others, it has brought much unrest to the Body of Christ and left many outside of it.  
Should these church leaders accept the faulty theology of that time then? Note that no denomination is at serious fault here.  
Starting from the Reformed branch by Martin Luther after Catholicism, even if (which I do not know for sure) there was a compulsory singing of Psalms and hymns only, and nothing else, and child baptism instead of adult ones, this would not prevent anyone from going to heaven or worshipping God in the wrong way. But it is exactly because the Dutch always want to be correct and are stubborn in their ways of thinking, and because they do not have much respect for the previous generations, they are not afraid to choose results over peace.  
It would have been much better if they had kept the peace and slowly moved towards the Baptist denomination, perhaps even waiting for the whole previous generation to die first before this could be implemented, if this could have prevented so many traumatized people, that is children who were not allowed to meet or play with those of other denominations.  
Of course this is only for issues that are not borderline with or inside of the core theology of Christianity. A split from Catholicism was granted, and should have actually been done sooner. Rather yet, the first church should never have accepted a pope nor the statutes the Roman Catholic church had.  
A church split in itself is not a bad thing perse either when one church mistreats its members, either sexually or psychologically. It would not require a denominational change perse, but a moral change, so that it makes it more easy for members from one church to go to another.

*And walking in the fear of the Lord and in the comfort of the Holy Spirit, it multiplied.*

I truly believe that one of the reasons why LEEF! Rotterdam Eastside, my current church, although it has been rebranded as Family Bible Church, is growing, is because of these three things. There is peace within the group. All honor to the Holy Spirit, but through its power and love He has worked through our cultures and personalities. The presence of a few relation-focused personalities, such as the I and S in DISC, and the presence of relation-prioritized cultures, such as the Eastern Asian one (we have people from Sri Lanka and Chinese countries) might have helped this.  

The power of the Lord, effectuating through our fear for Him, definitely is the source that has brought us further. It is seen in the mere subjects of our home groups, where we seek to sanctify ourselves and seek the will of God, regardless of what others think of us or what we have to give up. The fear of the Lord lets us know we are sinful, but the comfort of the Holy Spirit lets us feel His grace and acceptance.  
To outsiders, that is non Christians, this approach has not really been effective yet, and we are still learning, but to those within the church, the building up has been steady.  

As for LEEF Zuid, our mother church, this church is declining. Analyzing with the above measurement sticks, I think that leadership is still in fear of the Lord, although they have a different standard. 
There are two things that they have done wrong. The peace was gone after a few years, both within the leadership as well as between the leadership and the congregation, and the fear of the Lord has subdued in certain parts.  
So first of all, a married couple in the board of elders was burned out and it seemed that there was not enough attention for their problem. They left with frustration, in my opinion because no one heard their problems and wishes until it was too late. The elder was an S type and so did not speak or reject loudly enough when he did not agree with a certain decision of the board.  
The second reason, still within the category of disturbance of peace, was that there were members of the congregation who did not agree with the leadership's Sunday services (they wanted either DMM or more traditional services, and the current services were seeker-sensitive) or with the policy on homosexuality, which in this case the leadership was correct on.  
The problem was that the leadership was not transparent on both fields. It pretended to be seeker-sensitive and holy at the same time, but in current day's terms this is almost an impossible combination. As for services, a traditional and holy service has at least a sermon of thirty minutes, while the seeker-sensitive sermon is shorter and lighter. Rick Warren does a relatively good job in finding a balance, by creating an easy and practical sermon, theme-based, for at usually forty minutes and sometimes an hour, not being limited by time restrictions. However, even he still misses out on exegetical and expository preaching when sometimes this is necessary.  
As for homosexuality, one has to make clear to newcomers what the requirements are for being a Christian and serving in church, before they enter the church and start their ministry. This was not the case at Leef and hence a few couples left the congregation or grudgingly dragged along.  
  
The remarkable thing is that the leadership is Dutch and so would have a direct approach within a cold culture. The meetings within the leadership were cold indeed, with good organizational measures, punctuality and minutes, but reprimands towards the congregation were far from it and tended towards the hot culture ones.  
The fact is that leadership wanted the church to be more hot cultured and seeker-sensitive, but the careful approach towards the congregation was not because of these reasons only but also because of an inhabited fear of letting people feel rejected. This in itself has been imbued by years of residing in strict Reformed churches where rejection was schering en inslag #todo/opzoeken/engels but also because of their love for the unbeliever and the wish to attract these people.  
These two points are the source of what went wrong (not a lack of knowledge on hot cultures, what leadership keeps trying to improve by adding Chinese, Iranian and Sri Lankan people to their leadership). The first thing concerning rejection points to fear, and one should never act out of fear. The second thing points to their own wish to convert the unbeliever, which should never be put above God's Law. If anything is wrong and if anything needs to be taught, this should be done, whether this will exclude people because they do not feel welcome or accepted. God's Word embraces anyone who obeys it. God wishes to convert the unbeliever as well, but not by any means necessary.  
A third point, which in my opinion is wrong, is that there was not enough instruction for everyone to grow deeper in their faith, their ministry and their knowledge of the Bible.

**The Healing of Aeneas**
*32 Now as Peter went here and there among them all, he came down also to the saints who lived at Lydda. 33 There he found a man named Aeneas, bedridden for eight years, who was paralyzed. 34 And Peter said to him, “Aeneas, Jesus Christ heals you; rise and make your bed.” And immediately he rose. 35 And all the residents of Lydda and Sharon saw him, and they turned to the Lord.*

**Dorcas Restored to Life**
*36 Now there was in Joppa a disciple named Tabitha, which, translated, means Dorcas. She was full of good works and acts of charity. 37 In those days she became ill and died, and when they had washed her, they laid her in an upper room. 38 Since Lydda was near Joppa, the disciples, hearing that Peter was there, sent two men to him, urging him, “Please come to us without delay.” 39 So Peter rose and went with them. And when he arrived, they took him to the upper room. All the widows stood beside him weeping and showing tunics and other garments that Dorcas made while she was with them. 40 But Peter put them all outside, and knelt down and prayed; and turning to the body he said, “Tabitha, arise.” And she opened her eyes, and when she saw Peter she sat up. 41 And he gave her his hand and raised her up. Then, calling the saints and widows, he presented her alive. 42 And it became known throughout all Joppa, and many believed in the Lord. 43 And he stayed in Joppa for many days with one Simon, a tanner.*

It is a great treasure to have such a great woman among you, who might not be in a prominent position, but provides and serves the needs of others. Dorcas made garments and tunics, which could be expensive in these times, even if they were made from cheaper material such as cotton, because everything was still hand-made.  
If her work was to provide clothing for the church, it shows how much patience she has, for it takes a long time merely to weave a piece of cloth, let alone a whole tunic or garment.  
She was surrounded by widows, by not by men, which probably means she was single and did not have a large group of friends, but only older women as friends. Perhaps she took care of them, accompanied them or perhaps she was an older woman herself as well, one of those who devoted her life to Christ.  
My mother in law and my own mother as well are serving Christians. My mother has her work here and there, in restaurants and as cleaners and has a more social life than my mother in law. In that sense my mother in law is more like Dorcas.  
My mother in law serves the church silently without receiving any credits. She buys flowers, she has her set of pots. Sometimes she teaches women how to arrange flowers and only a few women from church are the people she spends time with mostly.  

Apparently this woman was important enough for the disciples to call Peter. Now Joppa was near Lydda, but still, Peter was a busy man with many people to heal.  
Imagine, an older woman, making garments, with only a few friends, what would be the impact if she were gone?  

One must realize, that the group of friends she has was small, and most likely the other women were alike and they too had only this group as friends and were contributing to the community in their own way.  
Paul mentioned elsewhere that the parts of the body that are not visible are most important and deserve most care and honor (even though they are the ones least looking for honor). As for our body, these are our organs, the filtering of bad chemicals through our liver and kidneys, production of adrenalin and gall, and what not to say of our intestines? All of these do not look as pretty as the body parts on our outside.  
So it is with these women. They may be old, but their function is onmisbaar #todo/opzoeken/engels  
They pray for the church, they take care of those whom we do not see, such as the lonely people standing all by themselves when everyone is having coffee and a chat.  
There is more to this which I unfortunately cannot see because I am not in an honorable position as theirs and I miss the capabilities to see what is actually needed. They know it, they feel it, and they are important for God to send Peter to them to heal Dorcas even from death, which has not been done even with the seemingly most important of all, the apostles.  

**Prayer.** Dear Father. Forgive me for my arrogance and pride of being on stage, to be able to teach others the Word, while the highest level of serving You is through love. This is what I know and what I teach, but those who do not teach from it publicly, are the ones who actually do it, that is these category of people.  
Help me to understand these people and appreciate them more, to honor and respect them accordingly, despite my differences with them and my lack of understanding their language, behavior and style.  
Let me be as honorable in Your sight, to You only, and not to others. Teach me to humble myself and to do the highest thing possible, to love You and others as myself.  

In the Name of Your Son, Jesus Christ.
Amen.

#biblestudy/devotionals/acts #tags/lgbt