# Acts 13 (ESV) — old (niet verwijderen)
#todo controleren en vergelijken met [[Acts 13 (ESV) — origineel]]

***Barnabas and Saul Sent Off*** 
*1 Now there were in the church at Antioch prophets and teachers, Barnabas, Simeon who was called Niger, Lucius of Cyrene, Manaen a lifelong friend of Herod the tetrarch, and Saul. 2 While they were worshiping the Lord and fasting, the Holy Spirit said, “Set apart for me Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them.” 3 Then after fasting and praying they laid their hands on them and sent them off.* 

Even after hearing the Holy Spirit speak, after worshiping and fasting, they continued fasting and praying before they laid their hands on Paul and Barnabas to send them out. 
Quite often in my own experiences with fasting I have discovered that the day after the last day of fasting seems like a celebration. Sadly, I must admit, that it is because because of my gullibility because I can then finally start eating again. This is not the right attitude as it is a pity as well to not be so close to God anymore. The time I have with God during fasting is the closest I have experienced, because I give up my worldly and bodily needs and become filled with the Holy Spirit. But alas, how often does my flesh win and do my fleshly lust overcome my spiritual desire for God? 
It is good to celebrate the end of a fasting period with another prayer, not of earnest need-if the fast was for that purpose-but with one of thanksgiving. 

It is good to see that the prophets and teachers of Antioch continued in prayer and fasting and that they laid their hands on Barnabas and Saul with the authority of God, longing only to serve God. 

It is difficult to send out our beloved brothers and coworkers in Christ. One the one side because we love them and still need them in our own local ministry, but on the other hand because (especially in these days) we never know if we will see them back. Many of the disciples died during their ministry. 

**Barnabas and Saul on Cyprus** 
*4 So, being sent out by the Holy Spirit, they went down to Seleucia, and from there they sailed to Cyprus. 5 When they arrived at Salamis, they proclaimed the word of God in the synagogues of the Jews. And they had John to assist them. 6 When they had gone through the whole island as far as Paphos, they came upon a certain magician, a Jewish false prophet named Bar-Jesus.* 

I do not know how big the island was, but going through a whole island is difficult. It might not have been as big as Rotterdam with its 250 churches, but proclaiming a strange Gospel in Jewish synagogues, could easily have led to the present leaders thinking of false teaching. It would be the same as when someone would come to our church and say that a man named Jesus has died and now new things have been revealed on top of the Word. 
It would be very hard for Barnabas and Saul to convince them of the truth, because most likely this far away they had not even heard of rumors of Jesus, so they did not even know if this person existed. 
Being accompanied with miracles would help of course to prove that what they are saying is from the Holy Spirit. But I can imagine that going through all of the synagogues on the island, trying to find their way into a synagogue in order to be able to spread the Word there already would be a tedious job. 
Then, if one synagogue did not accept you and warned the other synagogues of your coming, it would be even more difficult to get into the other synagogues. 

*7 He was with the proconsul, Sergius Paulus, a man of intelligence, who summoned Barnabas and Saul and sought to hear the word of God. 8 But Elymas the magician (for that is the meaning of his name) opposed them, seeking to turn the proconsul away from the faith. 9 But Saul, who was also called Paul, filled with the Holy Spirit, looked intently at him 10 and said, “You son of the devil, you enemy of all righteousness, full of all deceit and villainy, will you not stop making crooked the straight paths of the Lord? 11 And now, behold, the hand of the Lord is upon you, and you will be blind and unable to see the sun for a time.” Immediately mist and darkness fell upon him, and he went about seeking people to lead him by the hand. 12 Then the proconsul believed, when he saw what had occurred, for he was astonished at the teaching of the Lord.* 

To make things even harder they came upon opposition, and not just any, a magician and a false prophet, who probably had some influence among the people and followers through his fake miracles. Saul successfully removed this stumbling block from their and the proconsul's path, but perhaps now Elymas' followers would be opposing them as well, for example by spreading false rumors. 
Saul and Barnabas do not seem to be shocked or withheld by any of this. We, as Christians, should not be either. No matter what comes on our paths, whether it is one person or one with many followers; whether it is a normal person or the proconsul himself or a person with even more power; whether a normal human being or one with magic powers from the Satan himself, one simple act from God is enough to make this man disappear and as we can see from history, no one was able to stop the work of God. If anything, the Gospel was only spread further and further with every step they took and city they visited.

**Paul and Barnabas at Antioch in Pisidia** 
*13 Now Paul and his companions set sail from Paphos and came to Perga in Pamphylia. And John left them and returned to Jerusalem, 14 but they went on from Perga and came to Antioch in Pisidia. And on the Sabbath day they went into the synagogue and sat down. 15 After the reading from the Law and the Prophets, the rulers of the synagogue sent a message to them, saying, “Brothers, if you have any word of encouragement for the people, say it.” 16 So Paul stood up, and motioning with his hand said:* 
*“Men of Israel and you who fear God, listen. 17 The God of this people Israel chose our fathers and made the people great during their stay in the land of Egypt, and with uplifted arm he led them out of it. 18 And for about forty years he put up with them in the wilderness. 19 And after destroying seven nations in the land of Canaan, he gave them their land as an inheritance. 20 All this took about 450 years. And after that he gave them judges until Samuel the prophet. 21 Then they asked for a king, and God gave them Saul the son of Kish, a man of the tribe of Benjamin, for forty years. 22 And when he had removed him, he raised up David to be their king, of whom he testified and said, I have found in David the son of Jesse a man after my heart, who will do all my will.’ 23 Of this man's offspring God has brought to Israel a Savior, Jesus, as he promised.* 

This is clearly promised in 1 Chronicles 17. 

*24 Before his coming, John had proclaimed a baptism of repentance to all the people of Israel. 25 And as John was finishing his course, he said, ‘What do you suppose that I am? I am not he. No, but behold, after me one is coming, the sandals of whose feet I am not worthy to untie.’* 

Paul quickly provides an overview of the history of the Jews in an ever increasing way. He is talking about captivity, dwelling in the wilderness, war with seven countries, judges, a king that could be removed and a king who was a man after God's heart. He ends with David's offspring, Jesus. 

*26 “Brothers, sons of the family of Abraham, and those among you who fear God, to us has been sent the message of this salvation. 27 For those who live in Jerusalem and their rulers, because they did not recognize him nor understand the utterances of the prophets, which are read every Sabbath, fulfilled them by condemning him.* 

Those who did not understand the prophecies fulfilled them by condemning Jesus. It is true that if one understands the prophecy one can work his to not let the prophecy become reality. But the problem with the prophecies of the Oracles of Delphi has always been that the person who consults the oracle never understood the prophecy and then fulfilled these themselves, the most famous of them being Aegeus and Perseus' grandfather. 
In this case the same thing happened. See, however, how everything works out for God. If the people understood the prophecies concerning Jesus, they would not have killed Him or they would even have worshipped Him, which are good things. On the other hand, if they did not understand the prophecy, they would have killed Him, which is not a good thing, but it is according to God's plan. 
Now what would have happened if everyone had read the Bible more intensely and researched it more thoroughly and with an open mind and come to faith, would Jesus not have died then? 
I do not know the answer to that question. If Jesus did not die by the hands of the Jews He would have found some people to whom His message would have been offensive and those would have killed Him, such as the Indians or Buddhists. But if the whole world were not to have killed him #todo/opzoeken/engels als de hele wereld hem niet zou hebben vermoord 
everything would be faithful, like Abraham, who did not know Jesus. Would the world still be saved then? The answer is "no", Jesus had to die on the Cross, because faith is not enough for God. God needs the atonement of Christ through His sacrifice, and our faith in Him. 

*28 And though they found in him no guilt worthy of death, they asked Pilate to have him executed. 29 And when they had carried out all that was written of him, they took him down from the tree and laid him in a tomb.* 

It seems like Paul is saying that the Jews had a list to follow before Jesus could be buried. In fact there was, which is a list of all prophecies. God knew what would happen and had it written down by His prophets in the Old Testament. No prophecy would be skipped, not because God withheld the Jews from burying Him, but because He simply wrote down the things that would happen. 
God planned it this way, and what He has planned, He will make happen. 
In other words, all the things that happened between Pilate and taking Him down from the cross, were foretold in the Bible. Not everything was explicitly foretold, but Isaiah 53 tells us that Jesus was silent and that He was pierced.
Even though Isaiah 53 does not cover everything, which a Jew may argue, it covers some things that still need to be explained away. Even if a Jew has not researched the whole Bible and read all of the other verses containing prophecies about the Messiah, are these verses not enough to make a stance? At least these two verses in Isaiah should be rebutted in order to make a case against Jesus as being the Christ, right? 
In practice the Jews put the burden of proof on the Christians. "If there are 350 prophecies about the Messiah and our Jesus fulfills 35 of these, it does not mean that He is the Messiah" is what they argue. They are right on the one hand, but on the other hand some predictions are more powerful than others. Will there ever be another person who will be born in Bethlehem and be pierced on wood, i.e. crucified? Crucifixion does not happen anymore in this time, so the Jews can wait a long time before any person will ever be able to fulfill these 350 prophecies. The odds are even smaller than they were before. 

*30 But God raised him from the dead, 31 and for many days he appeared to those who had come up with him from Galilee to Jerusalem, who are now his witnesses to the people. 32 And we bring you the good news that what God promised to the fathers, 33 this he has fulfilled to us their children by raising Jesus, as also it is written in the second Psalm,* 
*“‘You are my Son,* 
*today I have begotten you.’* 
*34 And as for the fact that he raised him from the dead, no more to return to corruption, he has spoken in this way,* 
*“‘I will give you the holy and sure blessings of David.’* 
*35 Therefore he says also in another psalm,* 
*“‘You will not let your Holy One see corruption.’* 
*36 For David, after he had served the purpose of God in his own generation, fell asleep and was laid with his fathers and saw corruption, 37 but he whom God raised up did not see corruption. 38 Let it be known to you therefore, brothers, that through this man forgiveness of sins is proclaimed to you, 39 and by him everyone who believes is freed from everything from which you could not be freed by the law of Moses. 40 Beware, therefore, lest what is said in the Prophets should come about:* 
*41 “‘Look, you scoffers,* 
*be astounded and perish;* 
*for I am doing a work in your days,* 
*a work that you will not believe, even if one tells it to you.’”* 
*42 As they went out, the people begged that these things might be told them the next Sabbath. 43 And after the meeting of the synagogue broke up, many Jews and devout converts to Judaism followed Paul and Barnabas, who, as they spoke with them, urged them to continue in the grace of God.* 
*44 The next Sabbath almost the whole city gathered to hear the word of the Lord. 45 But when the Jews saw the crowds, they were filled with jealousy and began to contradict what was spoken by Paul, reviling him. 46 And Paul and Barnabas spoke out boldly, saying, “It was necessary that the word of God be spoken first to you.*

Why was this necessary? God could have just sent Paul and Barnabas to the Gentiles directly, skipping the Jews (although some Jews did listen (v.42) in which case God could have let Paul and Barnabas skip the next meeting in v.44, because it would not have any effect anyway. Surely, these particular Jews proved they were unworthy of receiving the gift of God (v.46) .

*Since you thrust it aside and judge yourselves unworthy of eternal life, behold, we are turning to the Gentiles. 47 For so the Lord has commanded us, saying,* 
*“‘I have made you a light for the Gentiles,* 
*that you may bring salvation to the ends of the earth.’”* 
*48 And when the Gentiles heard this, they began rejoicing and glorifying the word of the Lord, and ::as many as were appointed to eternal life:: believed.*

Another proof for the election and sovereignty of God. #biblestudy/theology/predestination/election

*49 And the word of the Lord was spreading throughout the whole region.* 

Of course the Gentiles were happy to hear this news, because salvation was now for them and of course the Jews were not happy to hear this, because they had been thrust aside. 
The response of the Jews was purely motivated by genuine envy. They did not want this Christian salvation themselves, but they did not want others to have it either. Salvation had to be for the Jews only—even if their view of salvation was wrong. 
I would even pose: if the Jews did not believe the Christians and if they believed the Christians were believing in a fake Messiah and different God—after all, if the God of the Christians said the Jesus is His Son and *the Messiah* and the two (and actually even three, including the Holy Spirit) are One—then the God of the Jews is a different God than that of the Christians, and their salvation is fake as well. If that is true, then why would the Jews bother that a bunch of their own people go out and spread a gospel that concerns the Gentiles? Rather yet, why would they care about Gentiles spreading a gospel for Gentiles? Did not the Romans do that among the Greek, when they replaced the Roman religion with that of the Hellenistic (Greek) one? Did not the Greek did that, when they replaced the one before it, whatever that was, perhaps the religion of Ottoman empire, with the Greek religion? #biblestudy/questions #tags/historic events# 
The Romans as well claimed anyone who did not believe in their gods would not be "saved" by their gods—although "saved" had a different meaning. Why did the Jews did not feel offended by that? Because they claimed their God was the real one. He was Yahweh, the God Who created the heaven and the Earth. 
Now the Christians claimed this same God to have different wishes than the Jews thought God had. They claimed the same God and the same book and the same history. Perhaps that is also one of the reasons why Paul and the other disciples start off their discourse with the history of the Jews #church/material/sermon But the main difference is, they claimed that the Jewish people were wrong about their own gods and that their own gods would not save them. #todo en de andere partij
Remember the anguish of Hezekiah when he tore his clothes hearing the messenger of the Assyrian king, Sennacherib, provoking the Jews about their god not able to save them. Remember also the anger and fury of David seeking for revenge on Goliath when he cursed the God of the Israelites. Remember the wrath of Eleazar when pierced through the bodies of the Israelite #todo/opzoeken and his Moabite mistress who was not only Gentile, but also unmarried! This anger is fueled by a healthy zeal for God and defending God against any false testimony God's power, about Himself and about His Law, respectively. This, however, was exactly what the Christians were doing. They were saying that God's power was also for the Gentiles, that God thrust aside His own people, that He was One with a *human* and that He allowed a human to change His Law. 
Now in one sense it was good of the Jews not to accept such changes bluntly. It is perhaps for the same reason why they did not accept nor believe Muhammad when he started spreading the good news of his own gospel about Allah and himself as the last prophet. First of all, the Jews did not easily accept any new prophet, just like they did not accept even their own prophets from the Old Testament or John the Baptist. Secondly, what Muhammad claimed was simply false doctrine and contradictory to the Old *and* the New Testament, so he was rejected by the Christians as well. This, by the way, was the reason why Muhammad was so furious about the two groups that he eventually decided to kill both of these groups and seize power through violence and inciting fear. 
I must say, however, that even though this stubbornness protected the Jews from false teachings and preventing the incorporation of other religions, such as those of the Samaritans, which did allow it, but were clearly found out to be not according to the doctrine of Christianity, it also caused them to reject the *right* additions to their beliefs. As mentioned above, they rejected the prophets and the Gospel. 
Stubbornness is not enough for protection. What the Jews lacked was a good portion of rational open-mindedness, first of all, and emotion susceptibility, and of course a fine balance between the two. 
This exact thing is what has led many—and I must say, unfortunately, *most*—Christians the wrong sects of the *Prosperity Gospel*, *Word of Faith* and the *Emerging Church*. 

*50 But the Jews incited the devout women of high standing and the leading men of the city, stirred up persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and drove them out of their district. 51 But they shook off the dust from their feet against them and went to Iconium. 52 And the disciples were filled with joy and with the Holy Spirit.* 

When one sees through the plans of the devil, but especially has hope in the plans of God, then one can be joyful even though the partial plan "fails". It is just like with Stephen, that his death was the end of the plan to spread the Gospel in Jerusalem on a big scale, but it kindled the start of the widescale spread of the Gospel throughout other regions, beginning with the Samaritan one, as Jesus had *planned*. So, yes, it was a pity that Stephen died and God did not "want" that, but it was His will, because He let it happen and it was part of His plan as well. 
In the same way God would have "wanted"—if I may be so disrespectful to claim to know what God wants—Paul and Barnabas to spread the Gospel to all people in Antioch, but since they were not allowed to, they just went on further to work on the other parts of God's plan. God's plan for Paul and Barnabas at Antioch was finished. 
So to us, humans, the plan does not seem to have been finished because we see that there is still so much more to be gained. But God has a plan for the people in Antioch as well, for each one of them, it just does not include Paul or Barnabas. 

So Paul and Barnabas shook off the dust from their feet and they were filled with joy, *after they had been driven out*! If you have the life experience of Paul, you will know what it feels like to fight against the storm or the waves. It is impossible. If someone then drags you out of that situation, what would your response be? A proud person would say that he could have conquered this storm, if only he had not been withheld by this person, or any other excuse. The truth is that he would never have won. A humble person, on the other hand, would realize he could never have won that fight and would be glad to be taken out of it. A God-fearing person would also know that God would finish the fight. 
So the next time you are taken out of a fight by God, be glad to know that this was a fight you could not have won, that God can win and that He *will* win. 

**Example.** In my personal job I have been working for a Christian company which also employs unbelievers to improve processes with digitalization and process optimization. I was on a roll with documenting all the processes, the weak points and the points for improvement, and receiving good feedback about my performance, until suddenly the manager says he has a bad review for me and that he is unsatisfied with my work. This happened to me in my life before, and there too, it was for vague reasons or because of one or two voices. 
God got me out of PwC and my friend, who worked there after me, told me she left the company because it was very secular, sometimes even up to the point of lying, to defend the company. I am glad I got fired there. 
Now, at Everlight, ... #todo/nogaftemaken 

#biblestudy/devotionals/acts 
