# Acts 14 (ESV) 
**Paul and Barnabas at Iconium**
*1 Now at Iconium they entered together into the Jewish synagogue and spoke in such a way that a great number of both Jews and Greeks believed. 2 But the unbelieving Jews stirred up the Gentiles and poisoned their minds against the brothers. 3 So they remained for a long time, speaking boldly for the Lord, who bore witness to the word of his grace, granting signs and wonders to be done by their hands. 4 But the people of the city were divided; some sided with the Jews and some with the apostles. 5 When an attempt was made by both Gentiles and Jews, with their rulers, to mistreat them and to stone them, 6 they learned of it and fled to Lystra and Derbe, cities of Lycaonia, and to the surrounding country, 7 and there they continued to preach the gospel.*

The disciples learned of the Jews' plan to stone them, but they did not learn of it in Lystra. God can enact His will in both ways. Sometimes He lets the disciples go without any serious infliction, and sometimes they are heavily inflicted, such as at Lystra through stoning, and near Malta through a shipwreck (in Acts 28). In other cases He even let Paul be flogged, while at one occasion Paul was not flogged because he mentioned he was a Roman citizen. Why would Paul have chosen not to say it one time and did say it at another time? Why does God choose different ways of letting His people be treated by the people of this world? 
The first answer lies in the question itself. It is *His* people, so He gets to decide what to do with them. One might think that that is not an answer, but the question actually is: "Do we even have the right to question God?" That answer for sure is *no*. I will refer to the old example of the potter and the clay in Isaiah where it is clear that the potter can do everything he wants with the clay and clay cannot and may not say anything about it. #todo/opzoeken  refer to Isaiah devotional
This is not unfair or harsh, as everyone would understand. People would only find it harsh when it concerns sentient beings, but people, in their pride, forget that they lack the sense to understand the greatness of God and that the difference between the potter and the clay is infinitely minuscule compared to the difference between God and man.  

**Paul and Barnabas at Lystra**
*8 Now at Lystra there was a man sitting who could not use his feet. He was crippled from birth and had never walked. 9 He listened to Paul speaking. And Paul, looking intently at him and ::seeing that he had faith:: to be made well, 10 said in a ::loud voice::, “Stand upright on your feet.” And he sprang up and began walking.*

There are two different streams within the church about faith and miracles. One says you need enough faith, while the other says it does not matter. While the first one seems to be verified here, the second one also occurs in situations such as Solomon's Portico, where a crippled man was healed who presumably had not even heard of the Gospel yet. 
What do we say then of the miracle here at Lystra and in the case where Jesus said: "Your faith has healed you"? and the many other cases where Jesus did so? (See https://www.gotquestions.org/your-faith-has-made-you-well.html) 
One thing we know for sure was that Lazarus was dead when he was raised to life again. So that miracle was not dependent on his faith, because it was nil at the time of the miracle. But Jesus' faith was plentiful. This would then confirm the second stream. 
It is always easier to heal a person who has faith than one who does not, regardless of whether the healer has faith, but what does this have to do with Jesus' famous line? Jesus' word about healing could point to spiritual healing, physical healing or both. In the case of the ten lepers in Luke 17:19 it is quite clear that one came back to thank Him and was spiritually healed as well, while the others were only physically healed. 
The lame person in John 5:1-13 also did not have faith. He was healed physically, but not spiritually. We know this because he only came to know it was Jesus who saved him in verse 13, *after* the miracle had already been done. 
We can conclude from this that those who have faith—not in the miracle only but in Salvation as well—and receive this miracle will not only be healed physically, but spiritually as well. The physical healing depends on the faith of the healer—and the grace of God of course—, the spiritual healing depends on the faith the healed one. Ultimately, however, everything depends on the Father. 

*11 And when the crowds saw what Paul had done, they lifted up their voices, saying in Lycaonian, “The gods have come down to us in the likeness of men!” 12 Barnabas they called Zeus, and Paul, Hermes, because he was the chief speaker. 13 And the priest of Zeus, whose temple was at the entrance to the city, brought oxen and garlands to the gates and wanted to offer sacrifice with the crowds. 14 But when the apostles Barnabas and Paul heard of it, they ::tore their garments:: and rushed out into the crowd, crying out, 15 “Men, why are you doing these things? We also are men, of like nature with you, and we bring you good news, that you should turn from these vain things to a living God, who made the heaven and the earth and the sea and all that is in them. 16 In past generations he allowed all the nations to walk in their own ways. 17 Yet he did not leave himself without witness, for he did good by giving you rains from heaven and fruitful seasons, satisfying your hearts with food and gladness.” 18 Even with these words they ::scarcely restrained:: the people from offering sacrifice to them.*

**Paul Stoned at Lystra**
*19 But Jews came from Antioch and Iconium, and having ::persuaded:: the crowds, they stoned Paul and dragged him out of the city, supposing that he was dead.*

In Antioch many came to belief, but by a handful of leading people and people of high standing they drove out Paul and Barnabas. At Iconium as well, they had stayed there for perhaps 1.5 years #todo/opzoeken  without any trouble but only bringing joy, miracles and I suppose converts over there and still the Jews and those who were on their side, thought the the disciples should die. And lastly, here at Lystra the crowd was worshipping them, how could they then be persuaded? 
It seems like it does not matter whether one is innocent and does good things for the city, or whether one has a big multitude of followers or even whether one is being worshipped as a god, there is always a way for the Satan to drive out the disciples from a city. Satan, unknowingly, is fulfilling God's plan as God probably wanted Paul and Barnabas to leave that city. 
That is why Satan only succeeded in Iconium after 1.5 years and not sooner, because God did not will it. That is also why Satan only succeeded in driving out Paul and Barnabas from Lystra *after* they had done the miracle and from the other cities after a number of people had heard the Gospel and given themselves to God. 

*20 But when the disciples gathered about him, he rose up and entered the city, and on the ::next:: day he went on with Barnabas to Derbe.*

Even though this is probably not the time that Paul died, which he refers to in #todo/opzoeken  —if that is about himself—it still is remarkable that the Jews find Paul in such a state that they think he is dead, and keep doing so even when dragging him out of the city (which means they stoned him in the city by the way). 
Can you imagine dragging a dead person all the way through town? Would you be careful with him when lifting him up, pulling his legs while dragging his head over the ground or carrying him with two or four people (although that is not what the word *drag* means). Now if you were Paul, would you be able to keep silent all the time, pretending you were dead? 
Perhaps Paul had a concussion or had feinted, so he did not even feel the pain during the dragging. My contention is that he was actually hurt and did not pretend so. He was either unconscious or he had really died. But when the disciples gathered around him, he must have been healed through their prayer and by the Holy Spirit. How else would he have the strength to go on another journey the next day? #todo/opzoeken where is Derbe on the map? 
One could say that he was still very weak from the stoning, and that he went on a ship to Derbe, quietly lying in his #todo/opzoeken bunk, kombuis, kajuit, kamer
with a few days or hours to rest well. Perhaps the disciples even had a cart for him to sit in so he did not have to walk to the harbor. We do not know, but this is not what the text says nor implies. 
God can do infinitely wonderful miracles. Even miracles can be outdone by other miracles. Even the "standard" miracles God can turn special. He really is above our minds and in ways we cannot fathom. 
So no matter in what situation you are right now, even if it does not seem like a miracle, do not give up hope, for God can turn it into a miracle. (See also Hosea and the *Valley of Achor* turning into the *Door of Hope*.)

*21 When they had preached the gospel to that city and had made many disciples, they returned to Lystra and to Iconium and to Antioch, 22 strengthening the souls of the disciples, encouraging them to continue in the faith, and saying that through many tribulations we must enter the kingdom of God. 23 And when they had appointed elders for them in every church, with prayer and fasting they committed them to the Lord in whom they had believed.*

**Paul and Barnabas Return to Antioch in Syria**
*24 Then they passed through Pisidia and came to Pamphylia. 25 And when they had spoken the word in Perga, they went down to Attalia, 26 and from there they sailed to Antioch, where they had been commended to the grace of God for the work that they had fulfilled. 27 And when they arrived and gathered the church together, they declared all that God had done with them, and how he had opened a door of faith to the Gentiles. 28 And they remained no little time with the disciples.*
#biblestudy/devotionals/acts