# Acts 21 (ESV) 
***Paul Goes to Jerusalem***
*1 And when we had parted from them and set sail, we came by a straight course to Cos, and the next day to Rhodes, and from there to Patara. 2 And having found a ship crossing to Phoenicia, we went aboard and set sail. 3 When we had come in sight of Cyprus, leaving it on the left we sailed to Syria and landed at Tyre, for there the ship was to unload its cargo. 4 And having sought out the disciples, we stayed there for seven days. And through the Spirit they were telling Paul not to go on to Jerusalem.*

#biblestudy/questions which disciples? Those that Paul created during his absence right after his conversion? #todo/opzoeken 

*5 When our days there were ended, we departed and went on our journey, and they all, with wives and children, accompanied us until we were outside the city. And kneeling down on the beach, we prayed 6 and said farewell to one another. Then we went on board the ship, and they returned home.*

The disciples in Tyre spoke *through the Spirit*, that is the Holy Spirit, not their own, that Paul should not go to Jerusalem. In Caesarea another prophet Agabus warned Paul against what would happen to him in Jerusalem if he were to go there. Now one can respond to a prophecy in two ways: one could see it as a warning *not* to go there or one could see it as a test from God to see whether one is willing to go *despite* of the dangers. It seems that Paul had the second thought.  
How can it be then that Paul, who is clearly in the Spirit and showing this by his miracles and the fact that his predictions are correct—he predicted correctly in his first Roman imprisonment that he would soon be free to see the Roman Christians #todo/opzoeken or others? and during his second Roman imprisonment he predicted correctly that he would soon be poured out as an offer, or in other words, that he would be executed, which almost all historians agree on, both secular and Christian—still goes despite of these warnings from the Spirit. 
First of all, the prophecy from Agabus was not a warning not to go. The text merely states what is going to happen, its intention is not stated in verse 11. Second of all, the disciples in Tyre, however, were clearly telling Paul **not** to go. However, there too a misunderstanding could have taken place. Perhaps the disciples interpreted this message as a call to stop Paul. 
Paul would have been stubborn if he simply chose for the second interpretation, in order to be tested by God on his willingness to go into danger. No, I do not think Paul was stubborn for in previous cities or countries such as his last time in Greece he decided not to enter the plot of the Jews, and in Thessalonica he decided to flee from the Jews as well. This time he was willing to go knowingly into the plot. I think it is because Paul had also heard from the Spirit that he had to go to Jerusalem and Rome (see Acts 19:21, 20:16,22). The answer from the Spirit within him could not contradict that of the prophet Agabus and the disciples in Tyre and so he came to the conclusion that it was a test. 

*7 When we had finished the voyage from Tyre, we arrived at Ptolemais, and we greeted the brothers and stayed with them for one day. 8 On the next day we departed and came to Caesarea, and we entered the house of Philip the evangelist, who was one of the seven, and stayed with him.*

It is noticeable that Luke names Philip "one of the seven". Surely Philip had the title of "the seven" which is translated or interpreted by many to be a "deacon"—even though that is not correct—for usually when a person leaves the church and settles elsewhere, he also loses his position and title of that church (except in the case when someone is a reverend for he will keep that title his life long, unless he were dishonorably discharged). In this case it had been many years already since Philip left Jerusalem and had come to live in Caesarea. The reason he has a special title, "the seven"—which is only used here and not "deacons", which is used in the congregation these days—is because it is a special role to assist the apostles, who themselves have a special role as well, comparable to—but not the same as—that of elders. 
The apostles were "elders" of the church of Jerusalem, but also of the Church of the whole world, that is the Body of Christ. They would not only preach the Gospel to those on the street, but what they preached, was authoritative for the whole doctrine of Christianity. So logically, their assistants were not mere deacons, but perhaps a special type of deacon with authority of the deacon-ship in the whole Church. 
Take for example Apple, where the late Steve Jobs #tags/famouspeople used to be its founder, CEO and something like Product or Hardware Manager, because he not only invented and designed the products, but also oversaw the internals of everything—up to the color and design of each part of the hardware. His primary technological assistant was Jony Ive, who was in charge of the design of the hardware (and I believe of software as well). Jobs resided in America, probably near the headquarters and oversaw not only the products created there, but also of the whole world. Jony Ive controlled the technology, not only there, but also throughout the whole world. So both had power and authority of the whole world, but in different fields, and Jony Ive stayed under the authority of Jobs. 
So perhaps the seven had authority to teach other congregations on how the church should operate, while the apostles had authority over how it should be governed and led. Unfortunately, we have only seen one example of how a church outside of Israel returns to Jerusalem to ask for the final call (in Acts 9 #todo/opzoeken ), but I am willing to assume that more messengers or letters must have been sent to Jerusalem for similar questions, just like Paul had been sending letters to different churches to correct and encourage them, and we have no examples of the authority of the seven (of whom now only six are left by the way since Stephen died). 

*9 He had four unmarried daughters, who prophesied.*

Luke is showing how blessed he was. Normally, having four daughters, and perhaps no son, would be a shame, for he would not be able to #todo/opzoeken/engels zijn naam overdragen, hand over his name? 
and being unmarried, if it meant that no one wanted to marry them, would also be a shame. But in this case the latter turns into a blessing, for it is rare when a woman gives up her life and dedicate it to God. There are cases where women have done that after their husband passed away, such as Jim Elliot's wife #tags/famouspeople/christian/missionaries and the story of Mrs. Saunders in the [Kucheng massacre](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kucheng_massacre) in [[Romans 15 (ESV)]]. 
Mother Teresa #tags/famouspeople/christian/missionaries is a good example, but outside of Catholicism, where it is hard to distinguish whether one is truly voluntarily a celibate, this is quite rare, as Paul has mentioned that only few have the gift of staying single. 
Now his blessing becomes even greater because his daughters *prophesied*. How rare it is for people to prophesy, not only for a short while after their conversion but having received the permanent *gift* and doing this their whole life. 
Needless to say these were godly women. A godly unmarried woman is far better than a beautiful yet ungodly married daughter or son, and one with the gift of prophecy is even worth more than that. 

*10 While we were staying for many days, a prophet named Agabus came down from Judea.*

This is the third mention of a prophet, not counting Ananias, the man who healed Paul's eyes, for he probably was not a prophet, not counting the baptized people who prophesied upon receiving the Holy Spirit, and the girl possessed by a demon in Acts ... #todo/opzoeken , the first time was ... in Acts ... #todo/opzoeken  who told Paul or Peter #todo/opzoeken and his companions to leave. The second time was ... #todo/opzoeken . 
These dangerous and complex missions required prophesy to 
* confirm and convict people of the presence of the Holy Spirit
* inform Paul of where (not) to go 

*11 And coming to us, he took Paul's belt and bound his own feet and hands and said, “Thus says the Holy Spirit, This is how the Jews at Jerusalem will bind the man who owns this belt and deliver him into the hands of the Gentiles.’” 12 When we heard this, we and the people there urged him not to go up to Jerusalem. 13 Then Paul answered, “What are you doing, weeping and breaking my heart? For I am ready not only to be imprisoned but even to die in Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.”*

Paul was human enough to understand that even the most mature and Spirit-filled Christians would be sad to hear the Paul would die, even if it meant he were going home to God, it would still be a loss of a good friend and companion in Jesus Christ. Paul here was not rebuking his friends, but rather encouraging them that he was ready to suffer for Christ. 
This is a great encouragement for everyone hearing this, for what could be greater than dying for Christ? This relativizes everything we encounter in life, whether it is losing a job, a wife or even a child. Some might say: "I had rather die than losing my wife or child." but that is because they have not been tortured before like Paul has. When one has suffered the forty minus one floggings that Paul has suffered, he will talk differently. Of course it does not take away all the pain of losing a child, but it will relativize it, knowing that Christ suffered even more for us than a mere forty lashes, because that was nothing compared to the wrath He felt from His Father. Then, when we suffer, but knowing that Jesus suffered incomparably more, we know that our suffering, and even the suffering of our loves ones, is a small price to pay and a great mercy from God. Any persecution following from here on, as Paul was facing, even until death, would be willingly entered. 

*14 And since he would not be persuaded, we ceased and said, “Let the will of the Lord be done.”*

It is striking that the disciples did not know that it was Paul's intention and God's will for him to be arrested in Jerusalem and eventually die in Rome. Paul must have already told them even before Agabus' prophecy, for example during the persuasion of the brothers in Tyre and before that when he announced he would go to Rome because God willed it. How could a progressive prophecy that showed not only the *destination* of Paul, that is Jerusalem and Rome, but also the *way*, which is by persecution, then change the brothers' minds? Were they like Jonah, know God's will, but trying to avoid it because our human will wants something else? Should these brothers not be further developed, especially when all of them had already read Jonah's story? 
Alas, it is the same with Christians today. All of us have read even more than these brothers. We have read the Old Testament as well as the New Testament; we have read about all their hardships and how God provides, prevails and how His will is ultimately done; we have even more than enough examples of missionaries, who have written more books than a normal person could ever read in his lifetime, who knowingly put themselves in the line of fire. Once again I refer to Eric Lidell #tags/famouspeople/christian/missionaries who had the chance to go back to England with his wife and family, but stayed behind in China to heal the people as a doctor with medicine and as a missionary with the Word of God. Still, after reading or knowing all this we still are like the brothers who try to persuade people not to go into the dangerous battlefield because we listen to our own flesh and want to keep our beloved ones, instead of encouraging them to do God's will. 
The brothers were already of this days before in Milete, when Paul met the elders of the church of Ephesus and announced that he would not meet them again anymore in this life and that only persecution and imprisonment would await him. But they had not had such a strong and clear indication as the prophecy by Agabus, which made them realize it was so near. 
This too is something recognizable in Christians today. We know about the warfare going on and that persecution is the single promise we have in our lives. Still, we willingly go into this warfare by our baptism, but when the battle actually begins, we hesitate or even resist ourselves or others from going any further. This is a good example of when Jesus says that people have not calculated the cost of following him and then halfway figure out that the Christian life perhaps is too high a cost (see Lucas 14:28). See also John Piper's beautiful answer on this question https://www.desiringgod.org/interviews/following-christ-is-costly-but-how-do-you-count-the-cost. 

*15 After these days we got ready and went up to Jerusalem. 16 And some of the disciples from Caesarea went with us, bringing us to the house of Mnason of Cyprus, an early disciple, with whom we should lodge.*

***Paul Visits James***
*17 When we had come to Jerusalem, the brothers received us gladly. 18 On the following day Paul went in with us to James, and all the elders were present. 19 After greeting them, he related ::one by one:: the things that God had done among the Gentiles through his ministry. 20 And when they heard it, they glorified God. And they said to him, “You see, brother, how many thousands there are among the Jews of those who have believed. They are all zealous for the law, 21 and they have been told about you that you teach all the Jews who are among the Gentiles to forsake Moses, telling them not to circumcise their children or walk according to our customs.*

Gossiping is something of all ages. No matter how good one lives there will always be opposition. In this case Paul was far away from Jerusalem and still the Jews bothered to slander him, to no advantage to them at all. 

The difficult thing is that Paul did sort of say what they were accusing them of, but they did not mention the context and the reasoning behind it. So let us get into that for a bit. First of all, Paul did not tell the Jews to *forsake* the Law of Moses—he said that the Law could not save us and that believers are not under the Law anymore, but under the blood of Jesus. It is only the blood of Jesus that can save us. Though the laws given in the Bible are good, some of those laws (although Paul does not mention this, but he means the ceremonial laws) are not necessarily to be followed anymore, especially not when they prohibit the gentiles from believing. 
Second of all, Paul only said that Gentiles need not be circumcised if they wanted to believe in God ... #todo/opzoeken but on the other hand he did circumcise Timothy himself. He did not circumcise Timothy so that he could be called a believer, but he did this only so that the Jews would be willing to listen to Timothy, for they likely would not have if they thought Timothy were a gentile, since he had a gentile father. As for the Gentiles, these did not need to be circumcised because everyone now was allowed to enter the Kingdom of God as long as their hearts were circumcised, not their bodies. 

*22 What then is to be done? They will certainly hear that you have come. 23 ::Do therefore what we tell you.::*

Regardless of Paul's great deeds, miracles and his anointing by the Holy Spirit and leading the only foreign missions, except that of Barnabas and Mark, he still accepted the authority of James, who had "only" been in Jerusalem and leading the church(es) there. 
We cannot say which of the two had a bigger task or responsibility. Surely, Paul had been more responsible for the spread of the Gospel among the Gentiles, but James had been doing the same among the Jews in Jerusalem and perhaps even further than that within Israel, though remotely, perhaps working with letters and through *the seven*, such as Philip who worked from Caesarea Maritima. Paul was initiating churches for a short time, while James was on the same location for a longer time to train the congregation in the Word of God and discipling them in their way of living. One could say that Paul was working in a broad way while James went deeper. 
At the same time, Paul had probably written more letters than all the other apostles, although it could also be that more of his letters have been found, preserved or preserved in our current Biblical canon. Assuming this is true, Paul was more of an initiator who kept in touch with the churches remotely and through short visits. We see from Paul's missions that he visited some churches more than once, such as Antioch, those in Macedonia (Philippi) and Greece (probably Corinth) and in Turkey (Troas). Ephesus is an exception for he stayed there for three years but most likely did not return to it anymore. In modern missionary jargon this type of missions would be called *short term missions*. James in that case would be in a long term missionary field, even though his missions were not overseas nor abroad. However, he was bringing a new culture into an existing culture. 

*We have four men who are under a vow; 24 take these men and purify yourself along with them and pay their expenses, so ::that they may shave their heads::. Thus all will know that there is nothing in what they have been told about you, but that you yourself also live in observance of the law.*

The four men were willing to take the vow to show that Paul did live in observance of the law, but actually Paul had not lived in *exact* observance of the Law as he *most likely* had eaten food offered to gods when he was among the gentiles. 
*MacSBNnkjv* notes that paying the expenses of the four men will show the people that Paul still engages in Jewish practice and has not forsaken his roots. However, would others with hypocritical intentions not do the same to cover up their real schemes? Many, if not all, potential presidents have used the name of God and used the Bible so as to become at least a little bit favorable towards Christians, which still amount to thirty percent of voters in the United States (my guess). Barack Obama used to be in favor of traditional marriage in 2008 (probably to attract Christian voters, although he later changed his position on that) and Joseph Biden during his electoral speech after supposedly having won the presidential race in 2020 (in November) quoted the Bible and said: "The Bible says: 'There is a time for healing'", from Ecclesiastes. These politicians would join baptisms or baptize their children, or pay for others' baptisms, they would even attend circumcision parties or Jewish bar mitzvahs, and the sacrificial feast (Eid Al-Adha) of the Muslims if only they could get their votes. 
Now Paul is honestly showing that he cares just as much, if not more, about his origins and still works out these through the Law as much as possible. Especially as a Pharisee, he would be abiding even stricter by the Law than his fellow Jews who are not. He writes about this in #todo/opzoeken  zie https://bible.knowing-jesus.com/topics/Paul~s-Boasting

*25 But as for the Gentiles who have believed, we have sent a letter with our judgment that they should abstain from what has been sacrificed to idols, and from blood, and from what has been strangled, and from sexual immorality.”*

We are already aware of this letter which was brought to the church of Antioch, but apparently they had created a copy of this and sent this to the other Gentile churches as well. 

*26 Then Paul took the men, and the next day he purified himself along with them and went into the temple, giving notice when ::the days of purification would be:: fulfilled and the offering presented for each one of them.*

***Paul Arrested in the Temple***
*27 When the seven days were almost completed, the Jews from Asia, seeing him in the temple, stirred up the whole crowd and laid hands on him, 28 crying out, “Men of Israel, help! This is the man who is teaching everyone everywhere against the people and the law and this place. Moreover, he even brought Greeks into the temple and has defiled this holy place.”*

It was not the Jews in Israel, but those from Asia who stirred up the crowd. Assuming that they did not follow Paul on his journey simply to attack him, like some did in Thessalonica all the way to Berea, and that they were in Jerusalem to celebrate Pentecost just like Paul was, they were again attacking Paul. Now what was their motivation? It was not like Demetrius' motive to simply get rid of Paul in order to make more money. The Jews in Asia wanted no bad doctrine and thought Paul was one to spread that and change the status quo. I will assume it was not to attract members, for having more member in one's synagogue would not necessarily make more money and it is not written that these were the synagogue leaders. We also know that they themselves, though being religious, were not devout Jews for they used lowly tactics to attack Paul using an attitude of *the ends justify the means*.
What purpose would it serve them to do the same here in Jerusalem? Even a Democrat would know that he should not speak when he is in surrounded by Republicans. The Democrats are only strong when they are together, but even they at least have a *purpose* when they are protesting. 

*29 For they had previously seen Trophimus the Ephesian with him in the city, and they ::supposed:: that Paul had brought him into the temple.*

Apparently there is something in people (of all religions, by the way) that looks only at outer appearances and *some* of the laws and regulations and ignores the rest. They were profoundly shocked that a gentile had been brought into the temple. That in itself is a good response for someone upholding the Law—although they were wrong in *assuming* it and not asking Paul whether the situation was as they thought it was. However, they are forgetting about the core of the Law, from which everything comes, which is love for God and for one's fellowmen. 
The same thing happens within the more traditional Reformed (Protestant) Church (I do not know about the Catholic Church). An example that is often used, most likely because it happens everywhere, is that when a girl gets pregnant outside of wedlock she must kneel at the entrance of the church and move forward, while kneeling, all the way up to the altar, as a symbol for repentance and atonement for her sin, if she wants to be accepted by the church again. 
Now this in itself is not wrong if she were willing to do it voluntarily, but in reality people are forcing her to do it, which is their first sin. Their second sin is their lack of empathy. In other words, they do not realize—nor do they take any effort to—what they would have done if it were them standing in her shoes. Thirdly, they do not consider her feelings at all. Fourthly even, they do not consider the feelings of those who are unbelievers and how this might drive them away from God. 
It is clear then that these Jews were traditional Jews and not really believers, although they might believe in the mere existence of God. They performed rituals and perhaps even believed they were doing the right things for even as far away as Asia was from Israel, they still held the Law of Moses, despite the fact that they could have become Greek and followed their practices if they had wanted to. Also, they could have decided not to make the long journey to Jerusalem (each year). But this "religious culture" was embedded within them and they were doing it to please themselves, not to please God. 
The fact that they were still Jews and were holding on to Jewish traditions is an act of mercy though. In the same way God has worked through "Christians" in the Netherlands, who have had many years of religion, without faith and love, but merely strictly moralistic and legalistic traditions. This is mercy because without even this, the Dutch would have gone completely secular. We see that God has held on to the Dutch people for multiple generations and only now, perhaps since the seventies of the previous century, has slightly let them go and follow what they wanted and worshipped, which is the world—and we see the present results in their own lives. 
The Jews as well, as orthodox as some are, still lead much holier lives and are blessed in many more ways than their secular Jewish counterparts who sometimes do not even know for whether it was Abraham or Moses who came down from the mountain and whether this happened during Pesach or during another event ( #todo/nogaftemaken my Jewish colleague actually did not know the difference). 

*30 Then all the city was stirred up, and the people ran together. They seized Paul and dragged him out of the temple, and at once the gates were shut. 31 And as they were seeking to kill him, word came to the tribune of the cohort that all Jerusalem was in confusion.*

What we know from this verse is that the intent was to kill him and that there were *many* people involved, perhaps not literally all of Jerusalem as the text says and probably not even all of those involved had the intent of killing him—aside from the fact that it is not even possible to kill or beat a man with more than ten men at the same time.
Now if some sent the word to the tribune this would have taken at least ten minutes, no matter how near he was to the place of the events. According to *MacSBNnkjv* their headquarters, *Fort Antonia*, overlooked the temple complex. Even then, the message would need to have been brought to him, he would need to arrange his troops (at least 200 soldiers, see the plural *centurions* in verse 32) and after arriving there he would need to disperse the crowd. By that time—and note that ten minutes is a highly unlikely *minimum*—Paul would already have been beaten to death or otherwise be unconscious. It must have been the Holy Spirit Who protected him from physically getting injured to a higher degree than he could bear or function. It could be that Paul continued suffering physically from all of this in his later life, but in any case, it was not as severe as it would have been if the Holy Spirit had not intervened. 

As for the word *came*, this message did not coincidentally come to the tribune. It would eventually be the tribune who prevented Paul from being killed (for now) and God let the word get to him. Just like in previous situations there always *happened to be* a person who prevented Paul's death. We saw how Gamaliel (in Acts 5 concerning the apostles but not Paul), Gallio the proconsul (Acts 18), the town clerk (Acts 19) and in Acts even the Pharisees (Acts 22) prevented Paul's immediate execution. God always makes sure the right people are around to lead the process and that the word is brought on time. 
Many movies depict this fact by bringing a climax at the most unexpected moment, when one most desperately needs a word of hope. In #tags/movies the *Netflix* series *Money Heist* for example, one of the criminal anti-heroes named *Lisboa* had been captured by the police and was nearly willing to spill the beans #todo/opzoeken/engels beter woord bedenken on the plans they had until at the very last moment she got a secret message from her boyfriend letting her know that he knew about her situation and the was still alive. Another example of coincidence is when the female protagonist in the movie *Avatar* #tags/movies, played by Zoe Saldana #tags/famouspeople, sees a holy seed landing on the person she wanted to kill. 
Why did they do this at the very last moment, just to make it more exciting for the viewers? Not only for that reason, but also because these things happen very often in life and these are not rare exceptions. It is God who reigns in everyone's lives, whether Christian or not, and everyone has seen the works of God and are without excuse (cf. Romans 1:19-20). Unbelievers can attribute it to coincidence, but they should have seen an above average amount of coincidence not only in their lives, but in movies as well. All of those movies are based on stories which eventually are a depiction of what has happens in life. That is what attracts people to these movies, because they recognize themselves in it. 
A movies about a utopian world without pain or fear does not relate to its viewers. The movies *Elysium* and *Battle Angel Alita* #tags/movies for example both have utopian worlds that float in the sky, but these world seem rather boring and fortunately these movies do not revolve around those. It is rather the real and harsh world down here on Earth on both movies that people relate to because of the pain and difficult way of living. How would it be possible then that so many writers or so many movies, and so many viewers as well, can relate to those kind of coincidences without finding them too much of a coincidence to believe or too unrealistic? If that were so, these movies would not have become popular with the crowd.

*32 He at once took soldiers and centurions and ran down to them. And when they saw the tribune and the soldiers, they stopped beating Paul. 33 Then the tribune came up and arrested him and ordered him to be bound with two chains. He inquired who he was and what he had done. 34 Some in the crowd were shouting one thing, some another. And as he could not learn the facts because of the uproar, he ordered him to be brought into the barracks. 35 And when he came to the steps, he was actually carried by the soldiers because of the violence of the crowd,*

The soldiers were probably carrying him because he was too injured and weakened to walk, but also to move forward faster in order not to be attacked by the crowd themselves. 

*36 for the mob of the people followed, crying out, “Away with him!”*

The same as they said about Jesus #todo/nogaftemaken 

***Paul Speaks to the People***
*37 As Paul was about to be brought into the barracks, he said to the tribune, “May I say something to you?” And he said, “Do you know Greek? 38 Are you not the ::Egyptian::, then, who recently stirred up a revolt and led the four thousand men of the Assassins out into the wilderness?” 39 Paul replied, “I am a Jew, from Tarsus in Cilicia, a citizen of no obscure city. I beg you, permit me to speak to the people.”*

Right after being attacked and still suffering from his injuries, Paul still begs to have a word with the Jews. He probably realizes that these Jews have not heard him speak before and do not know him. They were only stirred up by the Jews from Ephesus and none of them had heard Paul proclaiming the Gospel, because he not been doing that. His main goal right now at the temple was to finish the oath of commitment #todo  
Paul sees the big crowd and instead of escaping the murderous crowd he sees an opportunity to spread the Gospel. 

*40 And when he had given him permission, Paul, standing on the steps, motioned with his hand to the people. And when there was a great hush, he addressed them in the Hebrew language, saying:*

Luke, who at times neglects to write about important details (to us) such as the three shipwrecks (see [[2 Corinthians 11 (ESV)]]), notes very minute details at other times, such as here when he describes that Paul was standing on the steps and motioning with his hand. Why would that matter and why would the shipwrecks not matter? Even the question from the tribune about the Egyptian does not really seem to matter here. All we know is that the Holy Spirit inspired Luke to write these things and to skip other things. 
Perhaps this gives us an image of what Paul might have looked like, like an Egyptian (these days Syrians do not look much different from Egyptians. As a matter of fact all people from the Middle-East, except for the Jewish ones, look quite alike, but that is more due perhaps to Muhammad how spread his people out across those areas), or how Paul came across as a revolting leader in character. It could also tell us something about Lysias' personality who #todo/opzoeken/engels zonder al te veel na te denken presumed that Paul was who he thought he was. 
Aside from that, it also gives more reliability about historical facts and the time this account was written and that this news about the Egyptian, which can actually be found in history, was spread even to Jerusalem. 
Lastly, perhaps, the reason could be that Luke wanted to create some suspense in his storytelling and clearly the book of Acts was not written as a monotonous narrative, but rather as a story, slowing down and speeding up as the story along with its facts evolve. Julius Caesar actually did that as well in his book #tags/books on the Gallic Wars [Commentarii de Bello Gallico](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Commentarii_de_Bello_Gallico).

#biblestudy/devotionals/acts #tags/events/easter #tags/events/pentecost
