# Acts 11 (ESV)
**Peter Reports to the Church**	
*Now the apostles and the brothers who were throughout Judea heard that the Gentiles also had received the word of God. So when Peter went up to Jerusalem, the circumcision party criticized him, saying, “You went to uncircumcised men and ate with them.”*

It is good to see that the party, and we are talking about a group of people that are Messianic, that is they believe in Jesus, is criticizes Peter, even though he is the leader of the church, the one who had to be called in order for the Samaritans to be baptized.  
Peter must have been in a high position. I would suppose Cornelius had already heard of him, for he knelt down when he met him, although this is not sure. But it would not be unlikely that Peter was in high regard as one of the first apostles of Jesus, appointed to lead the church in Jerusalem and as practical leader of the operations happening there, aside from all the miracles he had been doing all over the country, including at Joppa, Sarona and Lydda.  
Yet, he was criticized when they thought he was doing wrong. This is because Peter is merely a man, not immune to scrutiny and subject to criticism as well, like Paul would criticize him a few years later #todo/opzoeken waar en wanneer?  
And the party itself knows this. This is healthy form of leadership where the leader knows he is not infallible and the others know there is room for criticism.  
Unlike the Catholic Church, where criticism seems to be out of the question in any circumstance, not to a person higher rank, let alone to someone above that or to the pope. This is why Martin Luther was in so much trouble, because the leadership there was not willing to admit any mistakes and that is also why catholicism in my view has not been blessed in the same way as protestantism. I do not know of new catholic church plants with great numbers of young people, catholic Christian contemporary music or movies. Catholicism still is in my view a religion where people are catholic because their parents were, regardless of whether they practice their faith. It is like Judaism, but unlike Jews, who actually are Jews whether they live out their faith or not, because it is in their DNA, Christians do not have privilege.  
On the other hand it must be said that protestantism is showing a disappointing trend in church attendance, growth and practicing of the faith as well.  

It is strange to see why these people still do not understand Jesus' message even though the Samaritans had already been baptized and received the Holy Spirit. It is even stranger, however, why Peter it did not occur to Peter what Jesus' real intention was with his command to spread the Gospel, not only to the rest of the world and only to the Jews in the world, but across all nations and peoples. After all, he was the one baptizing the Samaritans who were half heathen. If he could baptize half-heathens, why would he not be able to baptize full heathens?  
Furthermore, did Jesus not say that one day every tongue would proclaim His Name? #todo/opzoeken  

Also, it is noticeable that Philip did not have any problem with baptizing a heathen, and it was even a eunuch! But Peter needed a vision three times and he still did not understand.  
Some people have perhaps grown more accustomed to the circumstances they live in and are less willing to change the status quo. Luckily Philip was not one of those and followed God's orders without hesitation, it seems. But Peter, who had a little bit more trouble with it, could also understand the Jewish brothers in Jerusalem better because he too had the same view as they had. 
So it is good when some people have a problem they have overcome, so that they are in better position to bridge the gap between the Christian life and the world. God allows some people to fall more than others, He did not make them fall. They would all have fallen to the bottom if God had not withheld them, but in His mercy He lifts up some to come to Him so that they could later work for Him to reach out the lost ones.  
Can God not reach out to the lost ones Himself as He reached out to these first ones? Yes He can, of course, and He would do a better an quicker job than we would. But we would not be able to do anything for Him then, we could not serve Him, but most of all, we would not be able to learn anything and grow in our character.  

*But Peter began and explained it to them in order: “I was in the city of Joppa praying, and in a trance I saw a vision, something like a great sheet descending, being let down from heaven by its four corners, and it came down to me. Looking at it closely, I observed animals and beasts of prey and reptiles and birds of the air. And I heard a voice saying to me, ‘Rise, Peter; kill and eat.’ But I said, ‘By no means, Lord; for nothing common or unclean has ever entered my mouth.’ But the voice answered a second time from heaven, ‘What God has made clean, do not call common.’ This happened three times, and all was drawn up again into heaven. And behold, at that very moment three men arrived at the house in which we were, sent to me from Caesarea. And the Spirit told me to go with them, making no distinction. These six brothers also accompanied me, and we entered the man's house. And he told us how he had seen the angel stand in his house and say, ‘Send to Joppa and bring Simon who is called Peter; he will declare to you a message by which you will be saved, you and all your household.’ As I began to speak, the Holy Spirit fell on them just as on us at the beginning. And I remembered the word of the Lord, how he said, John baptized with water, but you will be baptized with the Holy Spirit.’ If then God gave the same gift to them as he gave to us when we believed in the Lord Jesus Christ, who was I that I could stand in God's way?” When they heard these things they fell silent. And they glorified God, saying, “Then to the Gentiles also God has granted repentance that leads to life.”*

The Holy Spirit fell on the Gentiles as Peter began to speak. He did not lay his hands on them or baptize them. The Holy Spirit worked in them so that they believed what they heard and could process what they heard, and then when they believed, He could live in them.  
John was surprised as well and it was only through his recollection of what Christ had said that followers of Christ would be baptized with the Holy Spirit, that he now understood that these followers were also eligible to obtain the Holy Spirit.  
Peter did not *give* them the Holy Spirit. The Holy Spirit went on them Himself. Peter knew then that he could not stop this and hence that this was the way to go forward.  

**The Church in Antioch**
*Now those who were scattered because of the persecution that arose over Stephen traveled as far as Phoenicia and Cyprus and Antioch, speaking the word to no one except Jews.*

We see here that the Christians did not merely flee out of fear for persecution—if they were ever afraid at all, for it could also have been that they simply fled because it is a wise thing to do instead of getting persecuted without a fair trial, which likely would have been the case seeing Stephen's trial and execution—but also to spread the Gospel as far as they could in a few days of travel. 
They were looking up the Jews it seems, and that is why they probably did not go any further, although there would have been Jews further north and east, due to the Assyrian dispersion and there would be Jews who remained in the areas of former Persia, but it would probably be more difficult to find them. The Jews concentrated around the more famous Greek cities mentioned in this verse and that is where the Christians were headed to. 
It is also logical that they came here first, because in a strange country without much traveling money the first place one can stop and rest would be at someone familiar, or at least a fellow countryman. 

*But there were some of them, men of Cyprus and Cyrene, who on coming to Antioch spoke to the Hellenists also, preaching the Lord Jesus. And the hand of the Lord was with them, and a great number who believed turned to the Lord. The report of this came to the ears of the church in Jerusalem, and they sent Barnabas to Antioch. When he came and saw the grace of God, he was glad, and he exhorted them all to remain faithful to the Lord with steadfast purpose, for he was a good man, full of the Holy Spirit and of faith. And a great many people were added to the Lord.*

So no one spoke to the Gentiles, except for some, those who were themselves from Cyprus and Cyrene. It could be that they heard the Gospel from the Christians who fled from Jerusalem and that they felt the urge to spread the Gospel to Hellenists as well, who could have been less than pure Jews by blood. 
It was this news, however, that let the church in Jerusalem sent Barnabas to Antioch and not new of the other converted Jews. Is it because it is more important to preach to the Gentiles? 
There could have been several reasons. For one, the Hellenists were also considered brothers, but were less likely to receive the Gospel. If the Gospel had been spread to Hebrew-speaking Jews, the word would most likely have continued spreading to the Jews in other cities. But since Hellenists were worshipping separately from Jews in separate synagogues where their own language was spoken, most likely Greek, there was a bigger probability that the Hellenists would be excluded from this message. 
A second reason is that the Hellenists could have been a better bridge to the spread of the Gospel to the Gentiles because of their familiarity with the Gentiles. They, themselves, could have been proselytes, i.e. Gentiles who had converted to Judaism, or they could have been partly Jew by one of their parents, but for sure they would have had more connection and history with the city and culture they lived in. 
A third reason is the protection of the purity of the message of the Gospel. Hellenists were known to have included some of the Greek pagan idolatry into Judaism and that was also part of the reason they were not fully accepted in Jerusalem as Jewish brothers. The Gospel is holy and should not be altered. It should be protected as well as possible and if the message was spread through disciples who had only heard the message themselves shortly before—say, a few years earlier—who now had to bring the message across in a different language with a different background and understanding of the Old Testament, then there would have been a big chance that the message would be corrupted. 
For there reasons it would be clear to send a Levite, such as Barnabas, to go and check up and exhort exactly that which is written in this verse, namely to *remain faithful with the Lord with steadfast purpose*. 

*So Barnabas went to Tarsus to look for Saul, and when he had found him, he brought him to Antioch. For a whole year they met with the church and taught a great many people.*

The whole year they spent with the church was not for nothing. I do not know if Paul eventually spent a year at every church he helped build up or planted #todo overzicht maken van locatie en duur 
but I would assume that it was necessary in order to build relationships and trust. Eventually Paul would ask each #todo/opzoeken  congregation for money to help the church in Jerusalem or other churches in need and in order to do so, trust is needed, especially if one will not see the other for years. 

*And in Antioch the disciples were first called Christians.* 

The disciples so resembled Christ that they were called Christians. Strangely, though, they did not reject this name. If we were called gods, God would reprimand us for accepting this name, but now we are called *Christians* which means *little anointed ones*, which is less than gods, but still, because it is referring not only to the anointed, such as David and even king Saul, but *the* Anointed One with a capital *A*. 
I would not dare call myself anything derived from Jesus. I would not give my son the name Jesus, Barjesus or anything even remotely sounding like it. I would also not deem myself worthy to be called an apostle or disciple of Jesus. But it is God Who has granted us the right to be called Christians, sons of God and disciples of Christ. What an honor it is to be named like that! 
How many people would have wanted to be named a disciple of a famous artist or painter such as Stradivarius or Rembrandt? Perhaps some would follow them and imitate their work or even continue their work, but they would not call them their students unless the master himself accepted them as such. Even more rarely would one ever call himself a little Rembrandt, daring to pose himself as almost equal to his master, and if one did so, it was pure haughtiness. 

*Now in these days prophets came down from Jerusalem to Antioch. And one of them named Agabus stood up and foretold by the Spirit that there would be a great famine over all the world (this took place in the days of Claudius).*

#todo/opzoeken  Great famine
Apparently this was a good prophet. The disciples would need to distinguish between good and false ones. How hard would it be to do that, given that the prophecy was about something would come in a few years and that would require sending large amounts of money to Jerusalem? How much faith would the church in Antioch consisting of Gentiles need for Jews in Jerusalem whom they did not know and who would perhaps not even recognize them as brothers? A lot. They would also need to have a lot of certainty concerning these prophets. 
I can only guess that the Holy Spirit did His work. He removed the false prophets, so these would not distort the trust of the new believers, and worked in the Antioch Christians to build up their faith, for faith is not from ourselves, it is the gift of God—and although the faith in Ephesians 2:8-9 is referring to the saving work of Jesus Christ it can also be applied here, for I believe that even this kind of faith is not from ourselves, but all is part of the grace of God. 

*So the disciples determined, every one according to his ability, to send relief to the brothers living in Judea. And they did so, sending it to the elders by the hand of Barnabas and Saul.*

The disciples, that is all of the Christians, sent relief, *each according to his ability*. God does not need a minimum amount of money to be able to build his church or to help others in need. Like John and Peter gave the man, through the Holy Spirit, the gift of walking again, so that he could from now on use his body to work and make money, in the same way God can give us abilities to make money or even more simple, to make things happen. 
In the case when Jesus had to pay taxes #todo/opzoeken for what by the way? 
God made a coin appear in the mouth of a fish. Perhaps he made one get lost by someone and then made a fish eat it, exactly for this purpose, or He actually created this coin out of nothing. 
Either way, God is the One Who is working and He has chosen to work through us to make things happen. God is the One Who chooses the method, which means He is not dependent on us and any time He wants He can choose another person or another method. 
In this case, God uses the method of distributing money in a certain way, so that man can redistribute it and in this way build character, honor God, be an example to others and help the needy all at once. Sure, things might go wrong when rich people like Bill Gates #tags/famouspeople use their money in the wrong way and forgo all of the above, or when smart but wicked people like George Soros use their money to make even more money, often on the backs of those who need it by buying companies and bankrupting them in different ways, such as selling them in pieces, and thereby letting many, sometimes thousands, of employees be without a job, destroying the economy in this sense, only to get more money himself and do more of these wicked things. 
I cannot say whether God has weighed the pros and the cons of this method, but the last two examples seem to be so bad that they outweigh all the good that can be done with money. First of all, however, I do not know the facts and second of all, even if I had, I would not know how to weigh it. 
I do not have all the facts of all the people on Earth in order to see how much good is being done. But even if I, the weighing of those deeds is valued by more than just the value of the money. One simple and seemingly minor good thing, such as the two pennies that the widow gave to the temple, to God can be a greater good thing than the 30 billion dollars that Bill Gates has given to his own foundation or the millions that Rick Warren has given to his church (which is over 90 percent of what he ever has received).

#biblestudy/devotionals/acts 