# Acts 15 (ESV) 
**The Jerusalem Council** 
*1 But some men came down from Judea and were teaching the brothers, “Unless you are circumcised according to the custom of Moses, you cannot be saved.” 2 And after Paul and Barnabas had no small dissension and debate with them, Paul and Barnabas and some of the others were appointed to go up to Jerusalem to the apostles and the elders about this question.* 

The Antiochs were wise in sending Paul and Barnabas and some others to Jerusalem. 
First of all because even though these two teachers would have known the answer and the arguments for it, it would have been more authoritative if the same answer had come from the original apostles. The fact then that Paul not-coincidentally had the same reasoning, would only show the oneness of the Holy Spirit and perhaps affirm Paul even more as one of the Twelve. 
Second of all, perhaps the other Antiochs went back to Jerusalem for several reason. They were introduced by Paul and Barnabas to the Jerusalem church, they could see first-hand the relationship between Paul and Barnabas and the apostles or at least the operational council and that there was a spiritual hierarchy, perhaps, but none socially. I am saying *perhaps* here because Paul actually was on the same spiritual hierarchy as the apostles because He was taught by Jesus Christ Himself as well and (hence) also one of the apostles in my view. 
Lastly, the Antiochs could serve as witnesses of the answer that came from the apostles. Anyone from the Jewish opposition could have written a letter from Jerusalem saying that only the circumcised were allowed to join the kingdom, and even Paul could have written a fake letter as if the apostles in Jerusalem were supporting him. But multiple witnesses from the Antioch church themselves could confirm that what Paul and Barnabas argued for was true. 

To Paul this may have seemed liked distrust, but I think it was not.
**Example** of woman in church talking with man. All of a sudden the man's wife joins her husband. #todo/nogaftemaken 
**Conclusion.** Having someone go with you is not always a matter of distrust, it is also for protection, witnesses of other things and company. 

*3 So, being sent on their way by the church, they passed through both Phoenicia and Samaria, describing in detail the conversion of the Gentiles, and brought great joy to all the brothers. 4 When they came to Jerusalem, they were welcomed by the church and the apostles and the elders, and they declared all that God had done with them. 5 But some believers who belonged to the party of the Pharisees rose up and said, “It is necessary to circumcise them and to order them to keep the law of Moses.”* 

There were believers who still belonged to the party of the Pharisees. I think Luke means *formerly belonged to the Pharisees*, as the theology of the Pharisees (which I do not know, by the way) does not encompass the Christology and divinity of Jesus, nor was it expanded with such. As a side-note: It could be, however, that the Pharisee doctrine was expanded with a Messianic belief and then turned into the Orthodox Church, which still has many resemblances with the Pharisees, such as the strict laws and clothing. 
This verse shows that the old human, the Pharisee, is still in us and wants to add to the pure Gospel of faith alone. Why would anyone want to add something that is already free? If you were to receive a Ferrari for free, would you pay the one who gave you this car? Perhaps you would do that as a small token, to show your gratitude. That would not be a problem if that was the intention, for the money would not be seen as a payment but as a gift. You give me a gift, I give you one. 
But if it were a big amount of money, this can hardly be seen as a gift. Suppose it is a thousand euros this receiver gives to the giver. What would the receiver say, when you ask him: "Did you get this Ferrari for free?" I am inclined to say that he would respond: "Not completely. I paid for it myself as well." 
For some reason people find more pride in something when they paid for it themselves than when they had completely freely received it. 
This is fooling oneself though. If it were not a 300.000 euro Ferrari Testarossa, but instead a 25 million private jet, such as Steve Jobs had and later Jony Ive, would one dare to say that with this meager 1000 euros he has not received this airplane for free? That would be a large discreditment to the giver. 

If God had asked us to give half of our life and half our time and our money to Him before we could be saved, that would still be a bargain, better than the example of the airplane above. In my perspective, this would even still be called grace because God gave us the opportunity, just like with a financial option to buy a stock. Through grace He gave us the option to buy ourselves in. The fact would still be that it is through grace that we have been saved, but the practice would show that the gratitude of humans would disappear, for in our haughtiness we would forget about God's grace and think that we had earned heaven ourselves.  
Aside from this argument, people would also think that Jesus' sacrifice on the cross would not be sufficient to save people—as if Jesus would not be strong enough to defeat the devil, but needed help from the person himself in order to free the person. 
This of course is not true and Jesus is strong enough Himself to save everyone on Earth, of all ages, no matter how bad, from the devil. He could, however, impose a restriction such as the payment of half of our life—not to aid in the "costs" of the sacrifice, but as a means to for us to show our commitment. This would lead us back to the problem above of man thinking he paid for salvation and hence earned it, but also it would exclude many a Christian who would be still in the progress of growing towards this status. Lastly, it would demotivate people from giving all of their lives and money, when only half of it would be sufficient—but God wants all of us, but He wants use to give it to Him voluntarily, because we love Him, not because we want to get into heaven. 

*6 The apostles and the elders were gathered together to consider this matter. 7 And after there had been much debate, Peter stood up and said to them, “Brothers, you know that in the early days God made a choice among you, that by my mouth the Gentiles should hear the word of the gospel and believe. 8 And God, who knows the heart, ::bore witness to them::, by giving them the Holy Spirit just as he did to us, 9 and he made no distinction between us and them, having cleansed their hearts by faith.* 

The fact that these Gentiles received the Holy Spirit is proof that God made no distinction between them and the Jews and that God cleansed their hearts by faith. 
The Jews probably did not realize, before Peter said any of this, that Abraham too was chosen by grace and that he too was uncircumcised. 
Perhaps they argued that indeed Abraham was saved first, by faith, and then circumcised as a symbol that he belonged to God's family, as would Abraham's descendants, but then this argument is refuted because the circumcision was a symbol of belonging to God's family, which would later be called Israelites, and even later the Jews as opposed to the Gentiles. This argument is not valid anymore because God is exactly saying that now the Gentiles are welcome to join God's family. 
Gentiles back then were welcome to join Judaism but had to be circumcised as well in order to show they had turned their back on the world. Then what is the difference with the situation after Christ's redemption? Gentiles are still welcome and Jesus too requires that there still must be a visible difference between the people of this world and Christians. However, Jesus gave the Great Commandment to go out into the world to spread the Gospel, while Abraham had not received this command. 
The difference between the situation back then and now is not that belonging to the family was not open to everyone but now is, because God has always wanted the all people to be His children. Rather, it is different in the activity of the Jewish people. Whereas they, the Israelites, were to become a bigger people and grow in spiritual maturity so that one day they could go out and preach, the Christians were those "grown" people who had received this maturity in order to go out and preach. 

#stories/bible/idea Idea story. Grow up to become stronger and better in order to train others.  
The original twelve had known the Father. Later on was hearsay, although His spirit still lived in them.  
But the children would think about why it took so long to grow up. Why they had to be so different from the world, while when they actually started evangelizing, their proselytes did not have to dress like they did.  

As an example one could say that when spreading the Gospel back then, before Christ, one would ask a proselyte to move to Israel, as a figure of speech, so that Israel would become more populated and stronger, and the proselyte would adapt himself spiritually, mentally and physically to the Judahite customs, but now the Gospel is spread to people who can then stay where they are and only change spiritually and mentally, so that they could from that location on continue to change the rest of the world. 

#todo/nogaftemaken Leg uit hoe dit er wel voor kan zorgen dat de boodschap steeds meer verwaterd of vervuild kan worden. Door de HG echter, zal dit niet gebeuren en als er mensen zijn die door God geroepen zijn om de theologie weer recht te zetten, dan zal dat gebeuren. 
Maar het belangrijke destijds was dat er een kerk is in Jeruzalem die de juiste theologie heeft om de overige kerken aan te sturen. 
Echter, wat er nu is gebeurd is dat de kerk in Jeruzalem er niet meer is en zelfs de eerste kerken er ook niet meer zijn (alhoewel wel wordt beweerd dat een van de eerste kerken, misschien nog uit het jaar 150 AD, in Syrië is, echter, die is orthodox en heeft niet de juiste leer van de apostelen en dat kan ook aangetoond worden, of andersom, zij kunnen niet aantonen dat zij wel de juiste en directe leer van de apostelen hebben, en wij niet, en dat zij het daarom anders doen dan de rest van de kerken). 
De kerk is vervolgens nog meer verspreid geraakt over de hele wereld, zover als het hedendaags reikt, en de centrale theologie wordt in stukjes geopenbaard door theologen over de hele wereld en in verschillende tijden en langzaam over tijd samengevoegd. Er zijn stukjes verdwenen, maar die zijn indertijd weer teruggevonden. 
Zullen er nog nieuwe profetieën en inzichten komen, zoals het Baptisme destijds kwam na de kinderdoop en de Reformatie van Maarten Luther? Ik denk het niet. We zien dat we al stromingen hebben die niet denominationeel zijn. Zelfs de Brethren, Vergadering der Gelovigen, die beweerden dat te zijn, zijn zelf een denominatie geworden met strikte statuten en als slag op de hamer de resultaten van haar gelovigen: mensen met traumatische ervaringen. De goede voorbeelden die uit die denominatie zijn voorgekomen zoals George Müller en Watchman Nee #tags/famouspeople hebben zich allebei gedistantieerd van die denominatie. 
De hedendaagse non-denominationele kerken zoals die van Paul Washer en John Piper #todo/opzoeken die alles baseren op de Bijbel hebben statuten die met geen enkele denominatie volledig overeenkomen. John Piper noemt zichzelf (of zijn kerk) weliswaar Reformed (i.e. gereformeerd) noemt, maar hij beweert zelf ook dat het "reformeren" een continu proces is, dat niet is geëindigd in de vijftiende eeuw, maar vandaag de dag nog steeds doorgaat. Hetzelfde geldt voor alle andere zuivere prekers en theologen, zoals Voddie Baucham en Justin Peters, die continue de onzuiverheden en fouten uit onze theologie en praktijk blijven halen en niet blijven vasthouden aan een kenmerkend punt zoals de interpretatie van de eindtijd of het spreken in tongen. 
#tags/famouspeople John MacArthur en Steve Cioccolanti, alhoewel zij zuivere sprekers zijn, komen niet over als prekers die hun respectievelijke kerken en denominatie constant aan het verbeteren zijn en boven het wereldse stelsel van denominaties aan het verheffen zijn. Het verschil tussen hun preken met die van John Piper en Paul Washer is dat laatstgenoemden zich meer richten op de levensstijl van een christen, en dat gaat buiten de denominatie om. 
Natuurlijk, het gebruik van alcohol en het omgaan met het huwelijk en de scheiding kunnen dingen zijn die kenmerkend zijn in een denominatie, maar als een preker bereid is een regel te beargumenteren vanuit het Woord van God, in plaats van vanuit het standpunt van een denominatie, dan stijgt hij boven de denominatie uit—en ik geloof dat iedereen die zoiets doet, uiteindelijk ook bij hetzelfde punt zal uitkomen. 

Daarom zien we ook mensen zoals David Pawson, die misschien een achtergrond heeft in de Anglicaanse kerk #todo/opzoeken zoveel overeenkomsten heeft met Amerikaanse predikers die een Baptistische of Gereformeerde of Pinksterachtergrond hebben. Dat is wat Michael Brown #tags/famouspeople ook zo bijzonder maakt. Hij onderzoekt dingen namelijk echt en haalt de bronteksten aan. Wat hem minder maakt, is dat wanneer hij spreekt over de gaven van de Heilige Geest, en met name het spreken in tongen, hij weer terugvalt in het kader van zijn charismatische of Pinksterdenominatie #todo/opzoeken. 
Dit is mijn beeld althans. Het lijkt wel op cherry-picking #todo/opzoeken/engels alsof ik in dit voorbeeld van in tongen spreken, meer achter MacArthur sta en hem meer neutraal vindt, net zoals ik dat vind van hem in het geval van het OSAS #biblestudy/theology/calvinism/osas vergeleken met David Pawsons standpunt hierover, maar het zijn de argumenten die het verhaal sterk maken. 
Alhoewel ik moet toegeven dat ik Browns argumenten nooit heb gehoord, MacArthurs argumenten in zijn Study Bible zijn dermate overtuigend dat ik moeilijk kan open staan voor andere argumenten. 

#todo/nogaftemaken Snellere vorm van verspreiding. 
Another argument for the proselytizing method of the Christians is that it is a quicker way of spreading the Gospel. But if that is true, then why had God not sent Jesus a few years earlier? It has nothing to do with the maturity of the Jews, right? 
The Jews had indeed not been mature since the time of the Judges where they continually fell into sin again and again and never seemed to learn from their mistakes. Only with a good leader such as David and a few of his descendants such as Hezekiah where they able to stay on the path of worshipping but one God. 
The thing that was not even able to make the Israelites learn from their mistakes was a major invasion and abduction, if you will, by the Assyrians where they lost their family and never saw them back due to the diaspora. The Jews from the southern provinces and tribes of Israel, Judah and Benjamin, only learned their lesson when they themselves were invaded by the Babylonians and abducted to Babylonia and lived in exile as strangers for seventy years. Only then they matured a little in terms of not worshipping other idols. But even then the real message of the Word of God had not entered their hearts. 
So the Jews were still not mature and according to the argument that God could only start the spread of the Gospel as soon as the Jews were mature enough to go into the world, God should have waited even longer before sending His Son. 

#todo/nogaftemaken 
Was the Holy Spirit not powerful enough? Was some maturity needed so that the Holy Spirit could finish up the rest? 
No, the argument is not maturity, but patience. As soon as God spread the Gospel, the focus would not be on the Jews anymore. Many or most of them would be lost. This is what happened as we have seen with the rise of Christianity after Christ's resurrection. 
Persecution on a grand scale had started. 
God waited because He wanted as many Jews as possible to be saved. Even before Christ had not come, there were people who were saved by faith (cf. Hebrews 11). Each one of them counted. If Christ had come earlier these people would have been saved as well, that is true, but would there have been less Jews saved in total? Perhaps not. The people who did not repent before Christ's incarnation probably would not repent after it either. But at least the people had lived out their lives, they had had an approximate 80 years to repent and if they did not, they would not have the excuse for not having had big enough of a chance to be able to repent. God gave all of these persons, except for the ones who died by the sword, e.g. in war, the time they had during their lives to repent. But from a certain moment on, God would have to say that it was now time to spread the Gospel to other peoples. 
As soon as that happened, most of the Jewish people were exterminated by the Romans within 40 years #tags/historic events#, or to be exact, within two or three wars (see Josephus, *the Jewish War* #tags/books) within a timespan of approximately three years. These people did not get the chance to live out their lives. But God is righteous, we may know that and confide and rest in His righteousness. 

*10 Now, therefore, why are you putting God to the test by placing a yoke on the neck of the disciples that neither our fathers nor we have been able to bear? 11 But we believe that we will be saved through the grace of the Lord Jesus, just as they will.”* 

Paul is probably referring to the yoke of keeping the Law of Moses. The Pharisees could have said: "No, what I meant was only the yoke of circumcision." but we can see from the rest of this chapter that it was not about that alone. The Pharisees wanted the new converts to abide by the Law of Moses as well. However, as I explained above, just like the circumcision the ceremonial laws within the Law were meant to distinguish between the Gentiles and the Jews and this was not needed anymore. Also, it would be much easier to convert more Gentiles if the ceremonial laws were disregarded. 
In this case the council's letter or decree was created because there were people who took offense, but when the Gospel was spread by Gentiles among the Gentiles there would not be any offense taken so the ceremonial laws could be completely disregarded in those situations. 

*12 And all the assembly fell silent, and they listened to Barnabas and Paul as they related what signs and wonders God had done through them among the Gentiles.* 

The miracles God has done through Paul and Barnabas have multiple purposes. They can show people God exist, to let people marvel at the greatness of God but also to make people listen to the stories thereof and be silent. All three ways are not ways to believe in God, but small steps to let people become more susceptible to the truth of the Word. In fact there are at least three types of unbelievers corresponding to these purposes. First, there are people who believe God exists, theists if you will, or more abstract people from other religions, although these do not believe Yahweh exists. Second, there are people who believe in the greatness of God, people from the Intelligent Design movement for example, they do not believe in God or a god per se but whatever He is, or they are (for some believe in aliens), they do believe in his *greatness*, and consider His work in the smallest field of nanotechnology (through the workings of DNA and the like) up to the greater field of macro-cosmology. Third, there are people who are *spiritual*, some are agnosts by choice, while others are agnost because they are still in search. They listen to the stories and theories from the Bible with an open mind with a possibility it exists. Still others believe them to be true but thing the same of other religions, i.e. all religions are true, but this category of people, open-minded as they are, are not thinking logically for if Christianity is true, all other religions are false, and hence these religions cannot co-exist. 

All three categories of people are possibly closer to actual belief in God than the atheists, although in practice some are even harder to reach than atheists. Take for example the Pharisees, who clearly belong to the first category. They know their history. They know God exists and which God it is, i.e. the God of the patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. Perhaps they even know His greatness, if they believe in the literal six-day creation according to Genesis 1. Still, we have seen throughout the Gospels and Acts how difficult it was to reach and convert them, while the Gentiles, though not atheists, had to come from much farther. #todo/opzoeken/engels further of farther hier gebruiken? 
Nicodemus, however, was an exception, who could be placed in all three categories. He was in the category of being silent and asking Jesus his questions. He still had the problem of not knowing about being born again and that was what withheld him from actually having faith in the Lord Jesus, for faith requires knowledge, for one needs to know Who one puts faith in and why. 

*13 After they finished speaking, James replied, “Brothers, listen to me. 14 Simeon has related how God first visited the Gentiles, to take from them a people for his name. 15 And with this the words of the prophets agree, just as it is written,* 
*16 “‘After this I will return,* 
*and I will rebuild the tent of David that has fallen;* 
*I will rebuild its ruins,* 
*and I will restore it,* 
*17 that the remnant of mankind may seek the Lord,* 
*and all the Gentiles who are called by my name,* 
*says the Lord, who makes these things 18 known from of old.’* 

It is marvelous to see how the prophets in the Old Testament all agree. This is of course because it is not the prophets' word, but God's Word. It is predicted here that the tent of David would fall, but that there would be ruins which would be restored. 
The people of Israel indeed had ruins left, which were the tribes of Benjamin and Judah, and were restored into a full nation. How many peoples did not have that prerogative? Since the time of the Assyrians all the surrounding peoples such as the Moabites, Philistines and even the Babylonians have disappeared, along with their languages, and that was even before the Ottomans or Muslims came. As far as I know the only other peoples of which remnants remained are the Egyptians, Syrians and the Greek, but the former two are far from what their forefathers were, perhaps even genetically due to the diaspora of the Assyrians and the mixing of peoples and especially due to the Islamic invasion #tags/religion/islam which has changed both nations' official language and culture. As for the Greek, their language is still spoken but their culture has mostly gone up into the present day culture—let alone its religion which has completely #todo/opzoeken/engels verdwenen disintegrated?. Only the Jews, albeit it very little, have maintained orthodoxy in their religion, laws, habits and language (culture). 
Even if there were another one or two peoples who have maintained these things, it would still be a prerogative to be one of the few among the many peoples and nations. No one could have predicted that his own people would be rebuilt or that even a remnant would stay. 
To make this even more interesting, ... extra voorspelling namelijk dat het allemaal is opdat zij Hem zouden opzoeken #todo/nogaftemaken 

... from of old... #todo/nogaftemaken 

*19 Therefore my judgment is that we should not trouble those of the Gentiles who turn to God, 20 but should write to them to abstain from the things polluted by idols, and from sexual immorality, and from what has been strangled, and from blood.*

The usual way of explaining this part is that to make a consensus with the Messianic Jews and the Christians, the Christians should now take on themselves a little bit of Moses' Law so that they would not offend the Judahite Jews or be a stumbling block to the Messianic Jewish (Christians).
In my opinion this, however, would go against what Paul said about the principe of putting an unnecessary yoke on proselytes, no matter how small the yoke. 
My interpretation is that the ceremonial laws of Moses could be abandoned, but some of these laws would still fall under the moral law. Let us start with the first rule. 
**Abstain from things polluted by idols.** Many objects have been polluted by idols, such as small statues or for example silverware with imprints or shapes of other gods or goddesses. It could be that a Christian does not value this god anymore, and simply uses a spoon for practical purposes. However, to the non-Christian or to weaker-minded Christians it might seem as if this Christian is still worshipping two gods and hence, he could be a stumbling block by giving a bad example. Also, it might tempt one to go back to his former god—although I doubt that would be the case with a truly converted Christian—and one would not show a statement of fully going for God by discarding everything of the old life. 
For the same reason, I think it is wise not to have images of idols in our material possessions, whether visible or not. 
So this rule was created for the benefit of other Christians and themselves. 
**Sexual immorality.** To be sure, there is a rule against sexual immorality in Moses' law, but that one still applies to Christians. Why would it be added to this decree if it was clear that the moral laws were discarded by God? 
I think the biggest part of sexual immorality is described in Leviticus 19, which is surrounded by all kinds of ceremonial rules. One of the reasons this rule might accidentally by discarded is because some might see it is as something ceremonial—although I think that is highly unlikely. 
One of the reasons this rule should be kept, is because the Seventh Commandment #todo/opzoeken names adultery. However, adultery is but one type of sexual immorality. To be even more precise, adultery does not even fall under the category of sexual immorality. In (Koine? or also in other Greek languages #todo/opzoeken ) Greek there are two separates words for the sexual sin: sexual immorality and adultery. Adultery concerns a sexual sin inside and during the marriage covenant. So one who is married and sees another woman has committed adultery, and a single person who sleeps with a married woman has as well. In both case the marriage covenant was involved. 
Some therefore say that sexual immorality then concerns all sexual sin outside of marriage, such as sex before marriage. Hence, in order to complement the Seventh Commandment, this rule had to be added. 
Another interpretation is that this sin was, and still is, just too great to be neglected and it is perhaps the most common sin, both in the Greek cultures as now. This needs to be addressed specifically. Not that this means that the other laws are not important anymore, but most laws like not killing and not lying are logical. Sexual immoral laws, however, though they are very logical, are too tempting but sometimes not very clear. Sex before marriage for example is something many people in this age struggle with and it is not clearly written in the Bible that this is forbidden, although sex with one person is clear and sex comes after the fulfilment of being betrothed such as in the case of Jacob, although again this could be interpreted as merely a cultural thing instead of a Biblical command. 



**...what has been strangled**
, and from blood #todo/nogaftemaken 

*21 For from ancient generations Moses has had in every city those who proclaim him, for he is read every Sabbath in the synagogues.”* 

#todo  
- [ ] Jotterpad en
- [x] writer big hugelabs opzeggen
- [ ] Voor de zekerheid bij Thushari checken dat het laatste salaris alleen vakantiedagen waren.

**The Council's Letter to Gentile Believers** 
*22 Then it seemed good to the apostles and the elders, with the whole church, to choose men from among them and send them to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas.*

The decision to send not only the Antioch brothers back to their home city, but Paul and Barnabas again as well as a few men from among them, was probably not made rashly. Verse 22 could have simply said: "They sent ..." but it says that "it seemed *good* to them", which implies that they had actually thought about it. 
Why would they have sent such a big group of people while the council in Jerusalem must have known that the Antioch church trusted their elders to bring back the message? Why would it not have been enough to send Paul and Barnabas back? Perhaps the answers to these questions are the same as to the question of why the elders had to come along with Paul and Barnabas in the first place (see notes on vv.1-2). However, we will also see, later on, that Judas and Silas were prophets and that they would bring extra power and encouragement by speaking the word of God (cf. verse 32). Also, Silas would decide to stay and help the church and assist Paul and Barnabas in teaching and preaching the Word, but even more importantly, he would join Paul on his second missionary journey.

*They sent Judas called Barsabbas, and Silas, leading men among the brothers, 23 with the following letter: “The brothers, both the apostles and the elders, to the brothers who are of the Gentiles in Antioch and Syria and Cilicia, greetings.*

This decree was sent to Antioch, Syria and Cilicia, but it was only in Antioch that we read about the upstirring from the Jews from Judea. Paul had previously been to Syria and Cilicia, after he had met Peter but before he had met the rest of the apostles. Perhaps the same issue happened there as well and Paul could now use this letter to proclaim this decree to all these churches. 

*24 Since we have heard that some persons have gone out from us and troubled you with words, unsettling your minds, ::although we gave them no instructions::,*

The council is clearly proclaiming here that they had given the Jews from Judea no instructions. It is not clear whether the Jews claimed that these rules were from Israel, but I can imagine that the Jewish and Gentile Christians in Antioch had much respect for those from Jerusalem. 
It is just like the people from Surinam, whom I went to visit. Although we were not coming from Jerusalem or any other major historically religious or relevant city, the people there looked up to us, perhaps because of the reputation the missionaries from the Western world have. Any instruction that is non-Biblical will cause confusion, even among those who are scholars #todo/opzoeken/engels geleerd 
especially when the Bible is not explicitly clear on this, as in this case of the inclusion of Gentiles. 
Whenever missionaries bring the Word and bring something that is either an interpretation of the Bible or a best practice, one should bring it carefully and not authoritative—as Paul has done in 1 Corinthians 7:11f. where he says that this is his opinion, although he does say in verse 40 that he (thinks that) he too has the Spirit of God. By leaving this leeway, those who oppose it have some space to protest and argue in a friendly manner. When this leeway is not present, there will be #todo/opzoeken/engels tweestrijd 
and the two or more parties will fight each other. 

*25 it has seemed good to us, having come to one accord, to choose men and send them to you with our beloved Barnabas and Paul, 26 men who have ::risked their lives:: for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. 27 We have therefore sent Judas and Silas, who themselves will tell you ::the same things by word of mouth::.*

It is explicitly mentioned here that Paul and Barnabas risked their lives for the Name of Jesus, which indicates that they are trustworthy men and willing to give their life for the truth and for their love for the unsaved. As an extra confirmation Judas and Silas would come and confirm that what they said was from the apostles in Jerusalem.

*28 For it has seemed good to the Holy Spirit and to us to lay on you no greater burden than these requirements: 29 that you abstain from what has been sacrificed to idols, and from blood, and from what has been strangled, and from sexual immorality. If you keep yourselves from these, you will do well. Farewell.”* 

cf. Noahide Commandments. in Genesis 7-9. 
These commands can be summarized as the command not to sin against God, against their neighbor and against their own body, which is God's (cf. 1 Corinthians 6 #todo/opzoeken reference, the body as the holy temple). The commands were phrased as follows. 
* Do not sin against God by sacrificing **to idols**(Footnote: The ESV and KJV have translated this command as to stay away from that which has been sacrificed to idols (which would mean that they should not eat that meat). However, the HSV translates this as the act of sacrificing, meaning that the Gentiles should not participate in these practises. In the context of the trichotomy I personally find this the better translation.)  
* Do not sin against your neighbor by eating the meat of **what has been strangled**, when he is in doubt. This does not mean that they literally strangled animals, but that animals were not killed according to Kosher laws, that is the killing of animals by slitting their throat in order to let the blood flow out. (See also notes on 1 Corinthians 8.)
* Do not sin against one's own body through **sexual immorality** (see 1 Corinthians 6:15-20). 

Note also how these three commandments are interwoven. The first commandment includes the act of sacrificing to idols, which is idolatry, and then eating the meat (which the second commandment prohibits), all of which happens with pagan rituals involving orgies (which the third commandment warns about). Also, the eating of blood in the meat would #todo/opzoeken/engels overtreden more than just the second commandment. It would overtreden the rule to kill animals in the right way, not to drink blood or eat meat with blood in it and not to eat meat sacrificed to idols—although Paul changed this rule, or better said, added a nuance to it, for other congregations, allowing them to eat this as long as they did not inquire about it nor participated in the pagan rituals. Lastly, sexual immorality defiles the temple of God, which is blasphemy against God Himself as well both in the way defiling what is His and in treating something badly that has been given by Him #todo/opzoeken/engels over which we should have been good stewards. 
So these three simple commandments cover a multitude of laws in the Old Testament. 

See also notes on 1 Thessalonians 4:9-12. 

*30 So when they were sent off, they went down to Antioch, and having gathered the congregation together, they delivered the letter. 31 And when they had read it, they rejoiced because of its encouragement. 32 And Judas and Silas, who were themselves prophets, encouraged and strengthened the brothers with many words. 33 And after they had spent some time, they were ::sent off:: in peace by the brothers to those who had sent them. 35 But Paul and Barnabas ::remained:: in Antioch, teaching and preaching the word of the Lord, with many ::others:: also.* 

The more often I read this part, the more people I discover who had gone from Jerusalem to Antioch. We do not know the exact amount because it only says "brothers" or "elders", so we know that there were at least two. Let us suppose that in the following deduction.
* When Paul and Barnabas went from Antioch to Jerusalem "two" elders were sent along with them. 
* When these went back to Antioch at least Judas, Silas and Mark were sent along with them, which makes at least seven in total. 
* Now Judas and at least one brother went back to Jerusalem, so that makes it eight. 
* Paul and Barnabas remained "with many others also". I assume many would mean this is much more than two, so let us say it is five people. Then we get to a total of thirteen people. 

I can easily imagine from the above logic that this was a party of twenty people who came and visited the church of Antioch, showing how much the people from Jerusalem cared about their fellow church whom they had even never seen before, except perhaps for some founders of this church during Pentecost. 

**Paul and Barnabas Separate** 
*36 And after some days Paul said to Barnabas, “Let us return and visit the brothers in every city where we proclaimed the word of the Lord, and see how they are.”*

Though Paul is depicted as a very strict person, being the teacher, the one to reprimand churches for their sins and even warning them that he can come in anger if they test him #todo/opzoeken no one can judge Paul of not being loving. Paul has (always) worked to supply for himself—in at least one city—so that he would not put any burden on the church #todo/opzoeken (or so that no one could say he is receiving money from the church #todo/opzoeken ). In all of his letters as well we see loving words and care uttered to the whole congregation and to specific persons—out of the many churches he has been to and despite all of his hardships and the many years that have passed, he still remembers their names. Also he writes more than once that he longs to visit the churches again. 
Keep also in mind that those letters he wrote were very long which also shows how much he loves those churches. 
I remember how I used to have—and still have, but no longer use—a small portfolio suitcase with paper of different types, shapes and colors to write to my friends and sometimes to a girl. Unfortunately my wife never received one of these letters because by that time computers and the Internet had already become standard and my letters were sent by e-mail then. 
But even at that time, I had never written anything as long, complex, well-thought and loving as any of the epistles to the Romans or to the Corinthians. 
Paul truly loved the churches he planted and helped build up. It was not merely a matter of result-drivenness. 
Even now, he could have gone to Troas and skipped all the churches he helped build up, but he did not. He was willing to spend the time there. 

*37 Now Barnabas wanted to take with them John called Mark. 38 But Paul thought best not to take with them one who had withdrawn from them in Pamphylia and had not gone with them to the work.*

Keeping in mind Paul's character which was rational but also loving, I think it is blunt to say that Paul is result-oriented while Barnabas is the more emotional type and would therefore give Mark another chance. 
I do not think this is a matter of getting a second chance or not. As we will see in later chapters the journeys were tough. Even without any persecution on the road from Antioch and Pamphylia, having only met a resistant Elymas the magician, Mark thought it had been enough and went back to Jerusalem. The exact reason was not given, perhaps it was fear, homesickness or he received news about a sick family member. Either way, to Paul it was not an acceptable excuse. Jesus too warned His disciples about calculating the cost of following Him, that includes the cost for going on a missionary as well. 
Perhaps this had been a good decision for Mark for it would only be in the next two cities of Antioch in Pisidia where Paul and Barnabas had to flee for their lives and in the city thereafter, Lystra, Paul was even stoned. 
In the case of the second journey as well Paul would be punished, together with Silas this time, by being beaten and thrown in jail. We do not know if Mark had suffered any on his journey with Barnabas, but there's a big chance that he eventually was martyred as well (see https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mark_the_Evangelist#cite_note-cocn-1).

So concluding from this (and from what I have written previously in Jotterpad?) 
1. Paul did not have a lack of empathy for letting Mark join him, but it was a dangerous journey and people needed to be confident and not afraid of persecution. Also, Paul could not afford people leaving him in the midst of a mission, as later on (see 2 Tim 4:10, Demas). 
2. This mission, or at least a part of it, was to visit the churches they had built up. Acquaintance with either the churches or experienced leadership was needed. Mark definitely did not have this acquaintance and perhaps did not have experienced leadership either. Silas on the other hand definitely had the latter according to Acts 15:22,32. 
3. Perhaps God wanted Mark to stay away from these persecutions until the time was right. In later years Paul would ask Timothy to specifically get Mark to join him in his ministry (see 2 Timothy 4:11)—although he was in prison at that time—still showing his affection for Mark and forgetting about the tensions caused by him in the past. 

*39 And there arose a sharp disagreement, so that they separated from each other. Barnabas took Mark with him and sailed away to Cyprus, 40 but Paul chose Silas and departed, ::having been commended:: by the brothers to the grace of the Lord. 41 And he went through Syria and Cilicia, strengthening the churches.* 

When reading the text it might seem like Paul is blinded by his anger, rashly deciding to leave Antioch in a different direction than Barnabas, and taking Silas along with him. Verse 40, however, clearly says that Paul and Silas had been *commended* by the brothers. 
The brothers most likely would not have commended or blessed Paul if he was embittered, for that is no state to receive the Holy Spirit in. It could be that Barnabas was embittered and that that was the reason no reconciliation was made. It could also be that Paul was embittered as well, but calmed down after a while, before departing for Syria. Either way, we may know that Paul left in a good way. 

Would you give your blessing to someone who is not prepared well or heavily emotionally influenced, not being able to keep his emotions? 

#biblestudy/devotionals/acts #tags/events/pentecost 
