# Romans 13 (ESV) 
**Submission to the Authorities**
*1 Let every person be subject to the governing authorities. For there is no authority except from God, and those that exist have been instituted by God.*

All authorities, even those from the government and everything beneath it, especially those in church but also those of village chiefs, have been instituted by God. As evolutionists say this kind of social hierarchy is the cause of what we creationists call "morality". According to them there is no morality, but only acting in everyone's favor so that there is peace. Humans would steal and kill, but because we can think, it would not be beneficial if everyone were to do that. 
This is utter nonsense of course because we see in many post-apocalyptic and dystopian movies or other productions such as the series *See* #tags/movies with Jason Momoa or *Mad Max* that if this were the case, the strongest or fittest would survive and we have seen the same things going on in our current time in Nigeria, Liberia and and short while ago in Rwanda. There was no *utilitarian* thinking there that it would be best for everyone if they did not kill the people but rather use them or their skills in Rwanda; Did they not know that destroying the electric circuit in Liberia would also remove the possibility for electricity for themselves? Of course they did, but their anger and madness overruled everything. 
That is why we, even though we do believe in moral values, still have to listen to the government because it creates a sort of order in the chaos. Would this have prevented the above examples in Africa? No, because they were caused by rebels. But if the rebels had obeyed the government it would have been less chaotic. 
Would it help any in Islamic countries where it is not rebels, but the government who persecutes you? No, there we have a different problem. This chapter is speaking about governments in general, and generally speaking governments are good. Most governments are good and of those that are not good, even most of the law is good. Countries with bad social and economic conditions such as Malaysia and perhaps all South-East Asian countries have good economic policies (once again generally speaking), but it usually is their justice department that is corrupt and as a consequence they cannot enforce their laws, which is why their economy is still not on the level of those of the West.

*2 Therefore whoever resists the authorities resists what God has appointed, and those who resist will incur judgment.*

In light of the current Coronavirus-crisis many Christians, but unfortunately not all, are in a dilemma as to whether they should obey the government and gather as Christians or that they should obey the Bible who commands us to (cf. #todo/opzoeken  Hebrews 10). It is my view that it is the devil's work right now to use this grey area where the government says something good (provided that risk of the Coronavirus is real, which I still have doubts about because over 99% of everyone who dies already had illnesses, whether young or old, and being old itself already was a weakening factor) and let's Christians first of all submit to their fears, and then second of all obey the government and disobey God's command to gather regularly. 
This particular strategy of the devil has caused many Christians—although I have heard of two only, personally—to become colder and feel less passionate as a Christian. Our simple opportunities to spread the Gospel or exemplify it have been taken away, although there still are other opportunities, albeit harder to grasp. 
When Christians are submitting to fear that is not the biggest problem perse. They can call out to God in their fears and ask them to provide strength and courage. However, I do not hear those people in church or in online (prayer) meetings calling out to God for their own fears. Perhaps it is because I am surrounded—by the grace of God—with fearless Christians in my church and through my church, online, with other fearless Christians. What I hear during our prayers is intercession for those who are afraid, for those who are not joining the meetings, be it online or in person. 
That is what truly is indicative of these people. They do not come to the meetings in person, they are for closure of the church meetings, they do not join the prayer meetings and they are afraid. There is one step I have left out, and that is that they do not worship God with all their hearts, soul, mind and strength. 
I am judging, too soon, because I do not know what is in their hearts, and for that I ask forgiveness. But if I were to be right after all, I would not be surprised. For the time being I will treat everyone as if they are rational, influenced by #todo/opzoeken bedoeld voor de mensen, zoiets als populair, en dus niet bedoeld om de waarheid te verspreiden, biased and fear-inciting news, and obedient to the government. 

*3 For rulers are not a terror to good conduct, but to bad. Would you have no fear of the one who is in authority? Then do what is good, and you will receive his approval,*

Should we, Christians, be afraid then when we gather despite the government's advise, warning or threat not to? Since we know that what we do is good we do not have anything to fear. On the other hand, it *could* be something bad, such as spreading the virus even more so that it becomes even more unmanageable. That *could* be the case indeed, but the question is: are the measures taken in proportion with the risk itself? My view on this is that these measures are far too high. 
There is no clear knowledge—and I am wondering why not—about how the coronavirus spreads (whether through air or touch) or how far the distance is that the virus can spread; Furthermore, they do not even know whether someone can get the Coronavirus even when one is sneezed upon. We could be carriers, but it does not mean we will be symptomatic and suffering from it. There is just too little info on this and the statistics are blown out of proportion. What percentage of people dies from Corona and what percentage dies from the flu? These numbers are never shown broadly on the news to still people. 
Either way, I do not think any party can say whether we are doing good or bad based on the available information. Some humility needs to be in place here and there needs to be mutual respect as well for each other's choices. The government's policies alone is not a sufficient argument.

*4 for he is God's servant for your good. But if you do wrong, be afraid, for he does not bear the sword in vain. For he is the servant of God, an avenger who carries out God's wrath on the wrongdoer.* 

I have the feeling that a lot of Christians and churches suddenly raise this verse of being obedient to the government and though I agree with this verse I am reluctant in believing their conviction. When did I ever hear Christians speaking of or preaching about obedience to the government? Almost never. I have heard one pastor using one example twice or thrice, about making payments transparant for the IRS, but aside from him I cannot remember anyone preaching about it. Furthermore, I think a lot of copying is done without the payments for copyrights. So the real reason why Christians all of a sudden want to obey the government and want to close their church doors is due to their own fear of the Coronavirus.

*5 Therefore one must be in subjection, not only to avoid God's wrath but also for the sake of conscience. 6 For because of this you also pay taxes, for the authorities are ministers of God, attending to this very thing. 7 Pay to all what is owed to them: taxes to whom taxes are owed, revenue to whom revenue is owed, respect to whom respect is owed, honor to whom honor is owed.*

So for the sake of conscience and to avoid God's wrath we pay taxes, but in verse 7 it says that we should pay what is owed to them. Would this also apply if the government imposes exorbitant taxes? On the one hand yes, it could mean that we only pay what we *should* pay them, which could be less than what they ask for, but on the other hand it is their country, so they can decide. We could always decide to move to another country. 
My brother, for example, decided to move to Germany due to better immigration laws for his wife who was from another country. Another person I know has moved to Belgium to get more tax benefits. 
I think that because we have the freedom to move, we should pay the government what is due, i.e. what they ask. If we do not agree, we can more. However, for others in the lower class within the Netherlands, or people from other countries such as Iran and China, where people are not allowed to emigrate to other countries, I do not think this rule applies, for the government could ask for their lives, so to speak, and they would then have to pay for it according to the Bible. That could not be the God's intention—in my humble opinion. God asks us for our lives and has asked us to (be willing to) give our lives for others, but that was in a different context, as in catching the bullet for one another. Although I can imagine that if the whole country rebels against these tax laws, except the Christians, it would give a very impression to the government of Christian obedience to their God, which in turn might change the heart of the government. But these situations and reactions would require a context specific insight from the Holy Spirit and the right answer cannot be known beforehand. 

**Fulfilling the Law Through Love**
*::8 Owe no one anything, except to love each other, for the one who loves another has fulfilled the law.::* #biblestudy/memorization/todo 

In the same line as with stewardship over money, God asks us to owe no one anything, except to love each other. The character of God and His commands are quite often the opposite of what the world teaches. Just as does for love, the law of *the more you spend, you less you have* does not apply here. 
Now the whole world is about money, everything in life is about money, whether you want to or not. Some need money to buy everything they need to survive in this world, for others money is everything they need to survive in their (high) class. But we are not from this world, we are merely *in* this world. Our bodies are still present here, but our soul belongs in heaven. So we use money to support our bodies and the morale of others. The act of *giving away* money, by seeing it as worthless to us, provides hope for those who need it so much. For they can now see that it is possible to treat money as worthless. That thing they have been hoping for and which is unattainable can be done away with so easily, by putting one's hope in the Lord, which is free. 
So giving money to others provides relief on two fronts. First of all it takes care of their basic needs such as food, water and housing. Second of all it gives them food for their soul, by showing them that there is no hope in money, but there is hope in something far greater than money and which is also more attainable than money. 
Now as for hope in money, I need to elaborate on that, because it can be interpreted in two ways. One can hope *for* money and hope *in* money. *Hoping for money* means that one hopes to get money some day. This hope is small, because one usually gets money when they work, and then still it is not a lot for most people. *Hoping in money* means that one believes money can save them from their problems, their misery and their poverty. The latter may be true, but the former is not caused by the latter. That is what they are missing. 
The Gospel provides hope on both fronts, because it is easily attainable. All one has to do is accept what God is already reaching out to them, salvation and God's grace and with it eternal life. When one has this salvation one can also put their hope *in* God and in this salvation, because it was made by the power of the Resurrection. As real as the Resurrection is, so real is the fact that we will resurrect.

#tags/prayer/money Help me, Lord, that I might be as generous as you are in giving money and love to others, for these are my weak points. I am too selfish to love others equally to or more than myself and I love myself too much to give money to others instead of to myself. Aside from that, I fear too and do not have enough faith that You will provide, and so I keep money on the side. 

*9 For the commandments, “You shall not commit adultery, You shall not murder, You shall not steal, You shall not covet,” and any other commandment, are summed up in this word: “You shall love your neighbor as yourself.” 10 Love does no wrong to a neighbor; therefore love is the fulfilling of the law.*

Every commandment ultimately can be summed up in love. Every commandment that has to do with hurting someone or doing good to someone, has do with one loving the other too little or sufficiently well. 
It is amazing to see how God has created a society where He put one variable and that when this variable is optimized the whole of society is optimized as well. If everyone were to aim for maximum love there would be no wars, economic stress, poverty or any other negative things, except for physical discomfort due to sickness for example.
Note that this is different from what the hippies in the 70s were claiming. They were also claiming peace and *make love, not war*, but real love has justice on the other side of the coin. It means criminals need to be punished and communism needs to be expelled—I am referring to the continuation of the Vietnam War—so that real love, which flows from the freedom the Vietnamese would then have, can thrive. 
Real love also pertains to loving one's own and another's body. It would not mean free sex and smoking marijuana, because these hurt the body and the soul. Furthermore, they cause a decline in morale and diligence—have you ever seen anyone smoking pot while being truly diligent at work or looking for work? Usually it is one way or the other, but not both. In practice this has led to many more drug addicts, an increase in unemployment and an impediment to letting the economy grow faster. 

The people of this world know that people are selfish. Economic and Game theories are based on that premise and that of maximization of utility. So economic policy makers have put policies in place that are driven by greed. That is eventually what keeps the market in check and causes the Free Market Economy to work well, which is the base of Capitalism. Socialism would work very well if love were the driver, but it is exactly because *greed is the driver, not love* that socialism has failed in every country throughout history. #tags/politics
In the kingdom of God this would not fail of course and we can see a minute example of that in our churches, which represent the Church which is the Body of Christ. Local congregations operate on a voluntary basis. Nearly everyone who helps maintaining these work for free and also donate to keep the church and its activities going. In return the poor are helped and the social and emotional weak people are raised to higher levels through programs such as the *Peace Plan* and *Celebrate Recovery®*, both created by Saddleback Church, California. 
For those who do not have enough funds to participate in meals or Bible Studies usually will be found a way because they are all part of the Body of Christ. It is not perfect, because we still live in a broken world, but it any country can boast about the results of socialism—where people are willing to sell their goods for the greater cause, where the rich offer their money for the poor and where real poverty is nearly inexistent—it is the Kingdom of God. #church/material

So the driver for the economy in this world is money and the greed for it, then what is the driver for morality or in other words justice? First of all it is money again, by imposing fines on everything from speeding to theft and robbery; Second of all it is withholding one's freedom by imprisoning people. 
I heard a person once say that the Bible never commands people to be jailed for a crime. It is either a physical punishment or a fine for retribution or compensation of the inflicted material or emotional damage. If this person is right, a wealthy man could go his way up until the monetary punishments, assuming the physical punishments prevent him from going any further. Personally, I think this idea of physical punishment is better than jailing people, because taking one's freedom away, how harsh it may be, has not prevented people from crime if we look at the crime rates. 
Here too, by the way, with love as a driving factor criminality would be at all-time lows. Have you have seen criminality in the Kingdom of God? That would be contradictory. If there was any—and there have been many pastors and elders who have stolen money from the church—they were not Christians and at least not loving persons. 

*11 Besides this you know the time, that the hour has come for you to wake from sleep. ::For salvation is nearer to us now than when we first believed.::* 

Perhaps this reference to time is because some people are thinking that they can postpone their good behavior until Jesus comes back. Now, however, Paul warns us that salvation is near. So if there is a time to wake up and be a good Christian it is now. 
Could this be the right interpretation? I do not think so. Remember that we are still in the continuation of Romans 12 where Paul sums up the marks of a true Christian. So Paul is speaking to Christians and love is just one of those marks, albeit the most important one. The next verses shed more light (no pun intended) on the explanation of this verse. 

*12 The night is far gone; the day is at hand. So then let us cast off the works of darkness and put on the armor of light.*

What Paul describes here is that we used to live in the dark. Everyone, whether Jewish or Christian, used to walk in the dark and doing things that belong to the dark. The sleep verse 11 refers to could mean the time of night when everyone is asleep. This seems to contradict the immoral acts in verse 13 though, for how could anyone do these things when they are asleep. But as often is with Paul, this does not have to be a contradiction. Paul could mean multiple things with a single expression. He could mean that we as Christians have been sleeping, that is *while* we were Christians we had not been paying attention to the importance of love and fulfilment of the Law. This is true even now, many whom I believe to be Christians, live a fairly good life, but they do not exert the most out of it. They spend their times on holidays and hobbies, while they good evangelize or help the Church in another way. It is all because they are sleeping and do not see the need of people of Jesus Christ and that their city and country can only be saved when people come to Christ. 
Another meaning Paul could also be intending *simultaneously* is the time of day, as mentioned above. One could parafrase this as: "Wake up, it's time to get up. The day has come. To those who were not sleeping, it not time to go sleep now, for Jesus is coming!" #todo/opzoeken 
Though the exegesis or eisegesis in this case might be a bit off the books, we have to understand that Paul, even though he writes like a perfectionist, and even though he is inspired by the Holy Spirit, could be writing verse 11 with people needing to wake up from sleep because the day has arrived, and verse 12 with those who are not Christians and still sin in mind. It is not like Paul had lots of drafting paper on which to sketch the details of the outline of this letter, but rather that he had to cite it while Timothy or Epaphroditus was writing it down, with merely seconds to think it through. Hence we often see additions such as "this is not from the spirit, but from me". With this in mind a textbook exegesis is not applicable but a more complex human interpretation is necessary. 

*13 Let us walk properly as in the daytime, not in orgies and drunkenness, not in sexual immorality and sensuality, not in quarreling and jealousy.*

As for these sins, it is not normal to do these things as Christians and then say: "Jesus is coming. Let us stop doing this and act normal now". Although that *does* happen in this world. How many men are not involved in prostitution and watching porn at night, and then showing up at work the next day? In some cultures this has even become normal, like Japan, Thailand and Hong Kong. 
In the daytime we all act morally. Some, like the political Left, still are not, but even then they make their acts seem like righteous acts. As mentioned before, the nighttime proves what a person is really capable of doing. I myself am the perfect example of that. What people show during daytime, does not indicate their behavior at nighttime is similar. In the book *Lord of the Flies* #tags/books #tags/movies we see that the behavior of the children with a specific character and trait on the boat, that is daytime, was amplified when they were on the deserted island. This could be true, of course, but we also see in Brett Easton Ellis' *American Psycho* that the protagonist Patrick Bateman showed his perverse hobbies in the evenings when no one was around. 
As Christians we need to change this culture. The behavior shown above with prostitution is done by people in Hong Kong (with Buddhist backgrounds), India (with Hindu backgrounds) and in Arabian countries (with Islamic backgrounds). The Hindus and other religions such as the Greek and possibly Wicca-like religions actually openly allow (temple) prostitution or sexual immorality in another form, or condone it. As far as I know Wicca has nothing in its book about moral behavior, everything is accepted. Christianity is the only religion that openly condemns sexual immoral behavior *and* practices it which can be seen through the practices of its followers. 

Aside from sexual immorality verse 13 also discusses jealousy and quarreling. How big of a problem is that these days within the Church? Although it is addressed openly in the Bible, it is unfortunately still a practice within many churches, although it happens more frequently in churches who focus more on religion than on the Gospel, or in other words on [legalism and moralism](https://www.gotquestions.org/moralism.html) than on God's grace in order to reach heaven.
But it is exactly because the Church has an active community that these things can happen. In Buddhism, in my view and limited knowledge, there is no community and people only visit the temple and pray or do studies by themselves. Perhaps there is a class on their scriptures, but it is not like they are working together, having fellowship, preparing for music together and have many formal and informal meetings. The same goes for the Hindus. The Muslims, however, are in this respect more similar to Christians, they have more community activities but are more quarreling at the same time. 
This still is no excuse for Christians to quarrel though and we should be very aware of the power of our tongue, that gossiping is a big sin addressed multiple times in the Bible, and the unity is the one thing we should all strive for (cf. Philippians 1:27). 

*14 But put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the flesh, to gratify its desires.*

Now this is a big thing to do: putting on the Lord Jesus Christ. As many facets as there are to clothes, even more there are to Jesus Christ. In Principle 3 of Celebrate Recovery we learn that we have to give over our *whole* life to Jesus Christ. That alone is a huge step, but it is only the first of two parts, which is taking off ourselves (i.e. our own clothes) and the second part is taking on Jesus Christ (i.e. His clothes). 
You will notice how hard it is to put on the glove of Jesus while your glove is still on, but it is even harder to take off your glove when His glove is already on your hand. 
This is the situation we put ourselves in when we decide to mix Jesus' teachings with our own. When we try to reconcile the teaching of the Bible with our own, and slowly adapt our way to that of Jesus, that is the hard way. It is much easier to throw away everything and going back to the basics. What is it that the Bible teaches? Not what your church of teacher has taught, but what is actually from the Bible itself? Throw everything you want yourself, and only take that which is from God for yourself. 
Verse 14 says it so clearly: *make no provision*. A provision is a reserve. You reserve a little bit of space for yourself to enjoy the things of the world, or a little slack for your own sins, to tell yourself you are taking small steps, but it does not work that way! You cannot tell yourself to visit the prostitute a bit less frequent every week or to drink less when you are an alcoholic. There can be no provision. You try to quit *cold turkey*—and if you manage to maintain sober for a day, that is victory. When you fail, it is a loss, but you try again and if you maintain sober for two days it is a victory again. That is what is meant by small steps. 

#church/material/crlessons/principle3

#biblestudy/devotionals/romans #tags/socialism