# Romans 8 (ESV) 
***Life in the Spirit***
::*1 There is therefore now no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus. 2 For the law of the Spirit of life has set you free in Christ Jesus from the law of sin and death.*:: #biblestudy/memorization 

These first two verses are in fact an answer to the conclusion in chapter 7 and earlier. The conclusion was that we are sinful and that we cannot do anything about that as long as we still have our fleshly body which is connected to sin and keeps dragging the soul down. However, this counter statement is that Jesus Christ frees us. It is that simple. 
Note how the arguments to show that we are sinful comprise multiple chapters, while the argument to show that we are saved is contained within a mere two verses (and a few extra verses for explanation). It is as if we need more explanation about our sinful state and each counterargument of ours to show that we are not sinful, must be attributed by Paul, so that no one has any excuse to say that he is not sinful or that he did not know he was. 
Now this law of the Spirit only applies to spirits as well, that is our spirits. Our bodies are still under the law of sin, and the spirit is under the law of the spirit. Only now that our spirit is under this law, and this did not used to be so, for it used to be under the law of sin and death, we can say we are free. 
Then does what happens with the body happen solely to the body? No, it is not. For if our body sins, alas, that is a pity, but our spirit stays pure, because we did not want it sin, but the flesh was stronger. However, if we *allow* it to sin—and *we* indicates our spirits here—then our spirits would be the ones sinning along with our bodies. It is like parents trying to control their children. Spiritually speaking, the parent is not responsible to God for their children's sin except when he allows the children to sin. 
Now the question arises, when the parent has done so, would that mean that this can never be forgiven anymore? The body dies along with all its sin, but what happens with the spirit? 
There are some who say that this determines what reward you get in heaven and whether you will be a king of one or of many cities. However, I find that not intuitive nor logical. I believe in different kinds of rewards, but if the minimum reward for *every soul* is always one city or at least being an inhabitant in a city in heaven, then it would not matter for us to sin all we want, for life in heaven is infinitely better than on Earth, no matter our position there, be it a cleaner of toilets. 
No, as mentioned in Chapter 7 the term "sin all we want" does not apply as soon as we have become Christians, because the amount of sin that we want is zero. No Christian *wants* to sin. 
So to counter the question "when the parent has done..." another question must be asked: "Is it *possible* for a Christian to sin with his spirit?" The answer is *no, it is not*. We have to remember that what Paul said in Romans 7:15-20, both at the beginning and at the conclusive end of this part is still true: *it is no longer I who do it, but sin that dwells within me*. We, i.e. our spirits, cannot sin anymore, only our bodies can, and we must do all we can to stop our bodies from sinning because that is not what we want. 

*3 For God has done what the law, weakened by the flesh, could not do. By sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh and for sin, he condemned sin in the flesh, 4 in order that the ~righteous requirement of the law~ might be fulfilled in us, who walk not according to the flesh but according to the Spirit.*

This is a very deep text, which can only be understood in the light of all that has been said before in at least Chapters 7 and 8. 
The Law, though it is good, is not perfectly powerful. It could not prevent people from sinning, neither by fear nor clarity nor reward nor the pointing to God. In that sense it was *weakened* by (human) flesh, for humans have their own will. Unlike in computers where a law is always obeyed, unless a particle of dust intrudes the process by landing on some part of the motherboard so that the electric current is disrupted, but aside from that, it is always obeyed as well as the laws of physics, humans disobey laws, by *nature*, imputed in us by God. This nature is called *free will* and it will—by definition—never be as perfect as God. 
There was only one way to let God's plan succeed and that is by putting Jesus in this flesh. Jesus is the only Person Who can control sin and command it to stay in the flesh only and stay away from the spirit. 
Before Jesus, sin was something that protruded both flesh and soul, but Jesus' Himself, or as the Bible says, His Word, cuts through the flesh and soul, or as Hebrews 4:12 says: *the division of soul and spirit* which (most likely) means the same thing here. In other words, it is Jesus Who split the spirit from the flesh and lets sin abide in flesh only. No one and nothing else has ever been able to achieve that. 
Now this (splitting) is the only way to let the requirement of the Law *of Moses* be fulfilled in us. Note that this law is still good and righteous according to verse 4. By splitting our being into two, a body and a spirit, Jesus could put sin in the one, while the other could be released.

*5 For those who live according to the flesh set their minds on the things of the flesh, but those who live according to the Spirit set their minds on the things of the Spirit. 6 For to set the mind on the flesh is death, but to set the mind on the Spirit is life and peace. 7 For the mind that is set on the flesh ~is hostile to God,~ for it does not submit to God's law; indeed, it cannot. 8 Those who are in the flesh ~cannot~ please God.*

The mind that is set on the flesh is *hostile* to God. Paul notes what Jesus has said before and that is that no one can stay neutral. One is either for Him or against Him. Even a nonbeliever who is "looking" for God is still hostile to God, for he still has his own arguments why he should not believe in God and those arguments are dangerous weapons. 
Even one who does not have any arguments for or against God, but simply ignores God out of disinterest, has the dangerous characteristic of nonchalance that could cost him his own life, but also that of others if he were to influence others by it. 
Hostility is not in the eye of the beholder, but it is a mere fact—are you aiding the advancement of the Gospel or are you not? If you are not, you are only standing in the way. If you are not susceptible for the Gospel, you are wasting the resources of the kingdom by letting Christians speak to you while they could have spoken to those who *are* susceptible. 
One may think that it is the Christian's choice for speaking to him, but that is not the issue here. The question here is what is hostile to the kingdom of God, and that is everyone who and everything that stands in the way.

*9 You, however, are not in the flesh but in the Spirit, if in fact the Spirit of God dwells in you. Anyone who does not have the Spirit of Christ does not belong to him. 10 But if Christ is in you, although the body is dead because of sin, the Spirit is life because of righteousness. 11 If the Spirit of him who raised Jesus from the dead dwells in you, he who raised Christ Jesus from the dead will also give life to your mortal bodies through his Spirit who dwells in you.*

This implies that our mortal bodies do not even have life yet. Surely, they can breathe, but that is not the definition of life according to God. As a matter of fact we were still dead before Christ came to awaken up, let us hear the Gospel and incited us to convert and repent. 
The Holy Spirit, which is the spirit Paul refers to in these verses, is powerful and can raise not only dead bodies to life—which is easy—but it can bring life to our spirits as well—which is much harder. The Holy Spirit can convict one of his own sins, He can let those who are deaf hear, those with hardened hearts become soft and make those who are fearful courageous. 

***Heirs with Christ***
*12 So then, brothers, we are debtors, not to the flesh, to live according to the flesh.*

We are in great debt indeed to our God Who saved us from all this wretchedness of what is us. We ought to live a good life with the bodies we have received, through the our spirit which has now been renewed and has been separated from our bodies, being pure and holy. We will never be able to repay this debt. Still, God asks us merely to live as examples to those who have not been saved yet. 

*13 For if you live according to the flesh you will die, but if by the Spirit you put to death the deeds of the body, you will live.*

There are several conditions and consequences for us to obtain life in the spirit, although these do not diminish the grace of Jesus Christ. One of these things is that what do in the body must be put to death. We cannot live by it, for everything our flesh gives, will only kill us further. 
Does this mean then we can never take a holiday anymore? No, because we still live in our bodies, our bodies need rest, so they are allowed to rest, and God has provided us with a vast wealth of cultures abroad which we can enjoy as well, all to the glory of His Name. However, if we are going on a luxury holiday trip with no added benefits for the Kingdom, then I doubt whether that is needed for or even allowed in God's kingdom. #todo/opzoeken 

*14 For all who are led by the Spirit of God are sons of God. 15 For you did not receive the spirit of slavery to fall back into fear, but you have received the Spirit of adoption as sons, by whom we cry, “Abba! Father!”* 

The term *sons of God* is used for kings or people of high stature, for angels and for godly men. In this context it is logical that it is used for the latter. 
Note how there are two spirits, one that causes fear and one that causes us to cry out to our heavenly Father. In both cases we are helpless, but only in one case we do not need to fear. In the latter case we are free to sin, but we do not want to, in the former case we are not free to stay away from sin and so we do it. 
These are opposites, but no matter strange how this is, these two opposites are incorporated into one body: the human who is also a Christian. 

*16 The Spirit himself bears witness with our spirit that we are children of God, 17 and if children, then heirs—heirs of God and fellow heirs with Christ, ::provided we suffer with him in order that we may also be glorified with him.::*

To be heirs means we need to go through the same as Christ has. In many cultures and stories a son cannot be the heir of his father's legacy or throne unless he accomplishes a set of difficult feats by which he proves he is worthy of the throne. 
Now we are not worthy of God's throne, we never shall be, only Jesus is and He has proven this and suffered for it. If we want to rule *with* Him, but not instead of Him, it is only logical that we suffer at least a little like He has. 
Our test is here on this Earth, although I would hardly call it a test. The test is—as Paul will explain in another book in the New Testament—the life we are living now. If we can maintain the good life we are to live, according to the Law of Moses (except for the ceremonial law, which Christ has fulfilled), with here and there a mistake because we are not perfect, but mostly to keep our faith until the end of our lives, we have proven that our faith is strong enough. 
Our lives may be difficult and it may be hard to keep the faith, but what I mean, is that our faith is either real or it is not. There is nothing in between. Eternal life has been given to us at the moment we convert. If the repentance was real then the conversion is also real and then the test will be passed, eventually.
This does not mean we can slack off now. No, it means that from the moment we convert and God credits us His righteousness, He also knows how weak we are and how much of His grace and power we need. He will provide us then with the power to pass this test of life and whenever we fail He is gracious to give us another chance and merciful for not inflicting the full punishment on us—or in other words, sending us to hell directly. 

***Future Glory***
*::18 For I consider that the sufferings of this present time are not worth comparing with the glory that is to be revealed to us.::* #biblestudy/memorization/todo *19 For the creation waits with eager longing for the revealing of the sons of God.* 

How can one consider something with another thing that is *to be revealed*? It is not even known yet. Through verse 19 we may know what it is that is going to be revealed—it is the sons of God. That should be us, Christians, however, in a different form. We will finally be revealed in a sinless body, with the ultimate freedom as God has intended, not restricted by sickness or pain, bad thoughts and bad intentions. 
We are waiting for this promise that is so unimaginable great that nothing can compare with it. The most healthy, happy, rich and spiritual person on Earth, combined together, could not even compare to the least of the sons of God. For who could live up to a hundred years old and still feel like a young man? Who could have ultimate safety without Jesus as supreme ruler of the world, where righteousness reigns? I tell you that both Democrats, Leftists (there is a distinction here between libertarians and liberals) #tags/politics and Republicans—so that is, across the *whole* spectrum or in other words, everybody—do not have peace of mind with all the injustice in this world. The Left, led by Nancy Pelosi #tags/famouspeople, wanted to defund the police, and she was arguing the opening of borders to all kinds of immigrants (whether criminal or not), but she called the police when people were peacefully protesting in her front yard. So she is willing to open the borders of her country, but not the door of her house. She wants to defund the police, but when she is in trouble she calls upon them. The irony in there is not difficult to find. Even she in her perfect liberal world, which America has almost become, does not feel safe, let alone the ones on the Right. 
But here I am only speaking of the benefits we will have in the Millennium #tags/theology/endtimes/millenium , and I have not even started talking about the New Earth yet! 

*20 For the creation was subjected to futility, not willingly, but because of him who subjected it, in hope 21 that the creation itself will be set free from its bondage to corruption and obtain the freedom of the glory of the children of God.*
 
Did God subject creation to Himself in the *hope* that He could free it? Would that not be counterproductive? Or does God want the honor of being the One Who set His children free? No, of course not! God deserves all honor and all honor is already to Him. Human beings were subjected to futility, to death that is, and not willingly indeed, but because of the laws of God. So yes, it is because of God that people are subjected, indirectly, but directly it is because of man's sinful nature. God created the Law in the *hope* that His children would obtain freedom, as freedom like no one has known but only a child of God has known, which up until man was created there were none. 
That too sounds counterproductive. So God created a law so that man could be free? 
Then why did God not just not create the Law at all? The answer has been given in the previous chapters all along.
God knew that because of man's sinful nature a world without a law, which is not hypothetical but actually was before Moses, would still not give man freedom. How much freedom was there in those days?
And so the only world where man could have real freedom, like those of God's children, is not a world where there is no law, and it is not a world where there is a Law where no one can abide by the law, although the latter still is better than the former.
It is a world where people do not want to sin, or in other words, where the law is in the people's hearts.
This is not possible in this world, even for people who have given their life to God, because we are still living in this body.
And then we get to the same conclusion as we have formerly come to, the only way to reach this is to split the body from the will. Hence, in heaven, where there is no body, but only will or spirit, there is no sin, and later, on the new Earth, our spirits will return to new bodies, with no sin. 
It is for this reason that Jesus said, on the last night before he died, when the disciples kept falling asleep in the garden of olives, that the mind is strong but the body is weak. 

*22 For we know that the whole creation has been groaning together in the pains of childbirth until now. 23 And not only the creation, but we ourselves, who have the ~firstfruits~ of the Spirit, groan inwardly as we wait eagerly for adoption as sons, the redemption of our bodies.*

The firstfruits indicated here refers to the first fruit of a produce, not to the first children or animals to be born, otherwise it would have said firstborn. 
The firstborn, which are by definition the most valuable, not because of the size or quality, but because one never knows for sure whether he will have more children or offspring, is what is offered to God. It is most valuable because it is the first experience a parent has. One offers the first born animals and symbolically offers his first born child as well. For a farmer with multiple animals he has to do this multiple time, once for each female animal, but for his own family, he needs to do this only once. 
This is symbolically represented in the fact that we needed to sacrifice animals multiple times, whether first born or not, at the temple, but God needs to sacrifice His Son, His firstborn, only once (cf. 1 Peter 3:18) so that the whole of mankind can be saved. 
Now the difference between the firstborn and the firstfruits, except for the plurality and the kind of organism, is that the firstfruits are generally speaking of the worst quality, while with animals and humans the firstborn says nothing about the quality of the rest. 
However, it is the fact that one has fruit at all that gives one hope, no matter how small or sour the fruit. For apple trees it may take three years before the first apples grow, and they will be small then, but we know then that more apple will come the next season. 
So we, who have received the firstfruits, yes, what we see right now through the Holy Spirit, the miracles, both physically and spiritually, are mere firstfruits and indicators of a greater hope that is to come. 

About adoption: We wait for adoption, this means that we are not adopted yet. Is adoption the same as the redemption of our bodies? As far as I understand this part of the Bible and other parts, it says we are already children of God, waiting to be adopted—which is strange, because usually you become a child *after* adoption. Here, however, God is not referring to adopting a child, because He has already done that at the moment we gave our lives to Him, but it is *we* who still need to adopt a body, not the current one, for that leads to death, but the new one, which we will receive on the New Earth (as far as I know, I have not studied that part yet). 
But why does it say "adoption as sons" then? #biblestudy/questions

*24 For in this hope we were saved. ::Now hope that is seen is not hope. For who hopes for what he sees? 25 But if we hope for what we do not see, we wait for it with patience.::*

This hope, that verse 23 is speaking of, is what has saved us. We do not have worldly certainty, something on paper—as if that will provide certainty—but we have Someone's Word, which is more valid than any other person's word.
And so we hope for the day that our bodies will be restored, but since we already know that it is going to happen, it is more than hope and in practice it is merely waiting. 

*26 ::Likewise the Spirit helps us in our weakness. For we do not know what to pray for as we ought, but the Spirit himself intercedes for us with groanings too deep for words. 27 And he who searches hearts knows what is the mind of the Spirit, because the Spirit intercedes for the saints according to the will of God.::* #biblestudy/memorization/todo 

It is clear from this part that the Spirit of God helps us to pray to God. We do not pray correctly, we might pray for the things we want, but not for what we *ought* to want. But even if we do pray the right things to God, it does not mean our hearts are set correctly. For example we need to pray for forgiveness—that God forgives a person—and so we do, but does that mean then that we actually want this person to be forgiven? Does our heart really go out to this person like Jesus' did? Most probably not, or better said, most definitely not, for there is nothing good that dwells inside us (cf. Romans 7:16). So the Holy Spirit helps us with groaning. 
The second way the Holy Spirit helps us, even if we do have groanings, it is when our groanings are too deep for words and we do not know how to express these. Then too, the Holy Spirit helps us. 
Thirdly, there are longings or other things, such as grudges and shameful things, which we do not know about because they are deeply hidden within our hearts, but the Spirit does know this and will pray them to God to heal them, provide them and forgive them. So even without our knowing we have been forgiven for the things we did not even ask forgiveness for. 

*::28 And we know that for those who love God all things work together for good, for those who are called according to his purpose.::* #biblestudy/theology/predestination/election #biblestudy/memorization *::29 For those whom he foreknew he also predestined to be conformed to the image of his Son, in order that he might be the firstborn among many brothers. 30 And those whom he predestined he also called, and those whom he called he also justified, and those whom he justified he also glorified.::* #biblestudy/memorization/todo

This verse is very well-known among many, fewer people, but still a lot, know that this verse is indicative of God's works and that He uses *everything* for *good*, yet *only* for those who are called according to His purpose. Now the question is whether the "called" in v.29 is the same as that in v.30. In fact, there is a whole array of questions that have to do with predestination and free will. 
In v.29 for example we see that those whom God foreknew He also predestined *to be conformed*. Whom did God foreknow? Did He select these persons? By what standard did He select them—is it anything related to merit? We do not have the answer, except that it was done out of grace.
A side question is whether people whom God did not predestine could also be conformed to the image of his Son. The answer to that is clearly no, *for all have sinned and fall short* (Romans 3:23).

Now about the predestination to conformation. Does God mold us, like He has said many a time in the Bible? If that is true, then where does that leave free will? The answer to this is that God already knows beforehand which persons are going to reject becoming like Jesus, even if God touches their hearts. Some others, however, need this kickstart from God coming to them and they are willing then to give up their lives in order to conform to the image of Jesus Christ—that is those whom God predestined and those who conformed—as they were willing anyway. 
Another thing that comes to mind is the term "in order that" #todo/opzoeken  hina? 
It sounds strange to create other people, just so that your only son can become the firstborn *among many brothers*. It is like one has a child, but in order to be able to call him "the oldest son" you want a few more sons. On the other hand, I think this verse should not be interpreted this way. It is rather that a father wants his son to have brothers—he wants his firstborn to be *among* other brothers. No one wants his son to be alone without any friends or brothers. 

We also see that this verse does not indicate that many are called, but only few will be glorified. In Matthew 22:14 Jesus says that many are invited, but only few are chosen. The wording is different there. We know from Romans that God has foreknown some people all along and let them go through this process: foreknow -> predestine -> call -> justify -> glorify.
So those who have been invited, to church, who have the heard Gospel through someone or read about it, who have even been on the brink of becoming a Christian, these were invited, but God did not know them. Examples of these are the atheists(Footnote: Shermer does not ascribe to atheism, he ascribes to things he is, not to what he is *not*. However, he did say he was figuratively knocking on doors to convince people that there is no god.) Michael Shermer, founder of *Sceptic* magazine, focused on evolution and other "sciences", and New Testament scholar Bart Ehrman #tags/famouspeople/critics#, both self-proclaimed former "born-again Christians",  they were invited, but God did not know them. They did their best, perhaps, as both were active in their ministry, and we cannot say whether they were just not willing to give their whole lives to Christ, or whether it is that they could not give their lives to Christ because God had not predestined them for that. Either way, this is another topic, but God is righteousness and God can choose whomever He wants. For the real truth is that *no one* would ever give their lives to Christ, because of our inherent evilness, which God did not place there, unless God removes this evil from our hearts. 

This leads us to the conclusion that everyone who has given his life to Christ c.q. God the Father, for those who did not know Christ in the way we know Him, such as Abraham and Moses, was touched by the Holy Spirit before that moment. Those who were touched, were chosen by the Father to be touched, for the Holy Spirit only does what the Father tells Him to do. 
So everyone needs to be chosen first, before he can ever get to Christ. The question was touched by the Holy Spirit, so that at least *we were able* to give the answer to accept Christ in our hearts, would our own sinful will be able to overrule this moment and decide to reject Christ anyway? The doctrine of *irresistible grace* says this is not possible #biblestudy/theology/calvinism/irresistiblegrace. Others might say that this would not be fair of God. 
1. It would not be fair to give people two options, but not being able to select the right one
2. If they are given the ability to choose the right one, there needs to be free will, so that it is the choice of man itself.
3. #todo/nogaftemaken 

**God's Everlasting Love**
*31 What then shall we say to these things? If God is for us, who can be against us? 32 He who did not spare his own Son but gave him up for us all, how will he not also with him graciously give us all things?* 

A lot of people are against us in this world. Although the percentage is less than we think and even this percentage is declining (see the book "*What's so great about Christianity?"* by Dinesh D'Souza #tags/famouspeople/christian   #tags/books ) it still feels like a lot because of the megaphones they are controlling, such as Twitter, Hollywood and the media.  #todo/nogaftemaken  

*33 Who shall bring any charge against God's elect? It is God who justifies.*

If a father loves one particular child so much he would even sacrifice his other child for it, who would dare then to bring any charge against this child? Of course if the child has done wrong, then it is logical that one does this. And so the devil does, he charges us with our sin, he rightly convicts us of our sin, but he does it for a different purpose. He does this so that we are punished and that we belong to him. 
At the same time, however, the Holy Spirit convicts us of our sin as well, yet for another reason, namely to lead us to the truth and to sin no more. Our committed sin, every one, even the ones we are going to do today, will be put on Jesus. 
So for this reason the Satan cannot charge us anymore, if there is anyone he should charge it is Jesus Who bears the sin but has already paid for it. So Satan can do nothing anymore except charge those for whom the price has not been "paid" yet, that is those who have not accepted Jesus. "Paid" in the sense that although Jesus has paid the price already by His sufferings, He has not given that "money" to the Satan yet.

*34 Who is to condemn? Christ Jesus is the one who died—more than that, who was raised—who is at the right hand of God, who indeed is interceding for us.*

Note that "who" is the subject here, otherwise this would have said "whom". Who can condemn but God alone, and who alone can condemn but the person who has been disadvantaged or who has paid the price. In some cases a person or a company might pay for the damage and in return be the one to condemn others. I cannot think of an existing example here, but suppose someone is hurt by a deliberate manufacturing mistake causing the lives of many people. A law firm could take up a class action suit against the company on behalf of those people. It is not exactly the same, because the law firm is not paying for the damage except that it is paying its own fees up front. 
In all human related cases God is the One Who is hurt, as well as another human being, but in this case all three are the same. Jesus actually is the only example I can think of who has paid for the damage in full, not with money but with His own life, and now has every right to condemn in stead of the Satan. 
And so sometimes He does not condemn, as in the case of the adulterous woman (cf. John 8:11).

*35 Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or danger, or sword? 36 As it is written,*
*“For your sake we are being killed all the day long;*
*we are regarded as sheep to be slaughtered.”*
*37 No, in all these things we are more than conquerors through him who loved us. 38 ::For I am sure that neither death nor life, nor angels nor rulers, nor things present nor things to come, nor powers, 39 nor height nor depth, nor anything else in all creation, will be able to separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord.::* #biblestudy/memorization/todo

Europeans and Americans have many stories about a death that conquers until the end. No one could separate Romeo and Juliet, not their background, their family or their friends. Not even if the whole world was against them. But that is all it was—until the end, which is death. In death they were separated and so was their love. The Hunchback of Notre Dame went a little further and loved Esmeralda even in the grave and was willing to be buried alive with her. 
The Chinese take it another step further and have many stories about love that conquers even death. There was this story of a boy who loved a princess girl, who was to be wed to other men. He protected her from them and even when they were pushed to a cliff, they had rather choose death than to share their love with another person—and so they jumped off the cliff. 
But later when they went down to look for them, they could not find any trace. Still some time later they found a flower they had never seen there before, it was a rose. The girl had transformed into a beautiful flower, but the boy had transformed into thorns to protect the girl. 
These stories, however, are but myths and everyone knows that it is relatively easy to separate people from each other's love. Wedding vows even contain the line (or at least, they used to in the Netherlands) "until death do us part." Death is all it takes. 
But the love of Christ is so strong that nothing, absolutely nothing, can separate us from it. All of the mentioned difficulties in verse 35 have not succeeded in separating people from the love of Christ. People have been killed and suffered in various ways, but still they have hung on to faith in Christ. 
Even things outside of this world have not been able to separate us from His love. People who have been possessed by demons have been released because God's love for us is stronger than the Satan's stronghold. 
So how could anyone then willingly set himself free from God's love and run back to the world? The explanation disbelievers of *Once Saved Always Saved* give, is that they can willingly give up God's love. But how did they come to that point? It is through conviction of materials they read, or pressure by others. 
If all of the above is not strong enough to separate us, then how can a book full of mistakes on evolution separate us from Christ? #church/material
The answer is: it cannot. It must mean that these people like Michael Shermer and Bart Ehrman were never Christians to begin with. 
#biblestudy/devotionals/romans