# Romans 16 (ESV)
**Personal Greetings**
*1 I commend to you our sister Phoebe, a servant of the church at Cenchreae, 2 that you may welcome her in the Lord in a way worthy of the saints, and help her in whatever she may need from you, for she has been a patron of many and of myself as well.*

In my former church we often received speakers, pastors and other ministers as guests to our church. Those guests were treated as kings, one could say. They received the food first when others were standing in line, they got the best beds and all the other benefits. However, they were also the ones who traveled from afar, who had to speak multiple times a day, with little rest in between, being disturbed by the many questions, being asked to attend Bible Study fellowships in the midweek, and visiting the country as a tourist as well.
It is good that we take care of our ministers and *servants* of the church.

*3 Greet Prisca and Aquila, my fellow workers in Christ Jesus, 4 who risked their necks for my life, to whom not only I give thanks but all the churches of the Gentiles give thanks as well. 5 Greet also the church in their house.*

Again Prisca and Aquila show up, being faith fellow workers with Paul ever since they met in Corinth (Acts 18:2). In the last part of the first letter to the Corinthians it is Aquila and Prisca who send their greetings from Asia to Corinthians. Here, apparently, they had moved back to Rome where they were originally from, and now it is Paul asking the Romans to send his greetings to them. 
Moreover, in Asia they had started a house church, and now they had started another in Rome. This has always been the desire of God, that new churches are planted wherever Christians are. 

*Greet my beloved Epaenetus, who was the first convert to Christ in Asia. 6 Greet Mary, who has worked hard for you.*

Paul frequently adds suffixes #todo/opzoeken/engels to explain a little about the one whom he greets. It is great information for us, who know nothing about people like Epaenetus and perhaps this was new information to the receivers, the Romans in this case, as well. Or perhaps this was to indicate the reason why Paul wanted to greet them, such as in v.6, where he greets Mary, (perhaps) because she has worked so hard. Paul could not have greeted everyone he knew in Rome if there were too many. So he made a selection based on these descriptions. 

*7 Greet Andronicus and Junia, my kinsmen and my fellow prisoners. They are well known to the apostles, and they were in Christ before me.*

If Junia was a woman, for this was a name for both sexes—it meant that women were imprisoned as well for ther belief (which was already known) but probably next to, or with men as well in the same cell. The latter is not even common in the most brutal prisons in the world, such as in Thailand or in Africa. 

*8 Greet Ampliatus, my beloved in the Lord. 9 Greet Urbanus, our fellow worker in Christ, and my beloved Stachys. 10 Greet Apelles, who is approved in Christ. Greet those who belong to the family of Aristobulus. 11 Greet my kinsman Herodion. Greet those in the Lord who belong to the family of Narcissus.*

I do not know much about the meaning of all these names, but Herodion is obviously derived from "king" Herod, was perhaps related to him, or named after him, just like many people name their children after their idols. 
Narcissus as well, might have been named after the mythical figure, but the emperor Claudius' secretary was also named Narcissus. I am not certain if this was a common name in those days. 


*12 Greet those workers in the Lord, Tryphaena and Tryphosa. Greet the beloved Persis, who has worked hard in the Lord. 13 Greet Rufus, chosen in the Lord; also his mother, who has been a mother to me as well. 14 Greet Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermes, Patrobas, Hermas, and the brothers who are with them. 15 Greet Philologus, Julia, Nereus and his sister, and Olympas, and all the saints who are with them. 16 Greet one another with a holy kiss. All the churches of Christ greet you.*

#todo/nogaftemaken 
Concerning the importance of greetings, see 1 Corinthians 16:15. 

**Final Instructions and Greetings**
*17 I appeal to you, brothers, to watch out for those who cause divisions and create obstacles contrary to the doctrine that you have been taught; avoid them. 18 For such persons do not serve our Lord Christ, but their own appetites, and by smooth talk and flattery they deceive the hearts of the naive. 19 For your obedience is known to all, so that I rejoice over you, but I want you to be wise as to what is good and innocent as to what is evil.*

Often times people make the argument that Christians should know about the evils of this world, of course not engaging in it, but at least having been exposed to it in order to form some immunity against it. Paul does not mention here that we have to be wise in the good things and wise in the evil things, but he emphasizes the *innocence* we need to have as to what is evil. If we indulge ourselves in evil things, even if only by knowledge, e.g. when someone watches movies only for the purpose of analysis in order to write reviews and warn others for the dangers of these movies, he will become immune indeed, but in the sense that he becomes less sensitive to the words of the Holy Spirit and to horrors and atrocities that are being shown in movies. 
One of the founders of the YouTube channel *Little Light Studios* who exposes hidden messages behind Hollywood movies—who was also a Hollywood actor who turned Christian—actually said that the more movies he watched, the more he became used to everything he watched. My personal experience is the same. After having been completely abstinent of movies for half a year now, I am more shocked by movies whenever I see parts of it on the Internet than I was before. After having seen almost nothing but modestly clothed women, I am shocked by women wearing a little less than that. This shock is indeed correlated with more attraction to the opposite sex, but the question is whether that is a bad thing. 
Guys who (regularly) watch porn are hardly shocked nor attracted by a peace of exposed flesh, in the form of a skirt that is too tight or too short. They behave normally, not because their moral compass tells them to do so, but because they do not feel any attraction. It is not their self-control is on such a high level that they can control themselves, but it is the mere fact that they are not attracted to stimulants of this kind. If there were a stimulant that would arouse them, however, they would not be able to control themselves, because they have never learned to control themselves. If they were able to control themselves, they would be able to stop themselves from watching porn, from masturbating and from thinking about it. 
A person who does not watch #tags/porn on the other hand, is someone who does control himself. When he sees exposed flesh, he can turn himself away from it, just like he stops himself from going on the wrong websites. Now it possible to shut down the computer, but not one's eyes when one is driving for example. Still, it is possible to look passed it, and forgetting what one has seen as quickly as it showed up. This, too, is part of the discipline they have acquired, for the reason that men (and women as well by the way) watch porn is because they start thinking of it and do not have the disciple to discard the thought. Eventually, the thought becomes a desire which they cannot control, after which it becomes an action. When one cannot control his thoughts and discard the bad ones, he cannot control his actions either. #quotes/church #church/material/sermon
So how does one train young children then in an isolated environment without sexual stimulants? We train it by training their discipline in general. If they can be patient, persistent in Bible studies, in the pains and sufferings that accompany childhood and the coming of age, for example by obeying one's parents, denying oneself, forgiving one another and humbling oneself enough to ask forgiveness for one's *sins*—these will train the child into a righteousness (2 Timothy 3:16-17) that is sufficient to implement 1 Corinthians 10:13.

*20 The God of peace will soon crush Satan under your feet. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.*
*21 Timothy, my fellow worker, greets you; so do Lucius and Jason and Sosipater, my kinsmen.*
*22 I Tertius, who wrote this letter, greet you in the Lord.*

This proves my point about which I wrote in #todo/opzoeken to show that what Paul writes does not need to be interpreted literally, otherwise it would be very difficult to interpret the "I" here.

*23 Gaius, who is host to me and to the whole church, greets you. Erastus, the city treasurer, and our brother Quartus, greet you.*

*MacSBNnkjv* claims that this Erastus is probably not the same as in Acts 19:22 or 2 Timothy 4:20 because Erastus was a common name. The latter reference puts a individual named Erastus in Corinth, and if he is not the same as the city treasurer here in v.23, then there are two persons with that name in Corinth. 
Regardless of whether there are one or two, it is for certain that a tile or plaque has been found in Corinth, which is still present at the time of writing, in which are engraved the names of those who gifted something, e.g. a statue or a monument, to the city. One of those persons named on that plaque is Erastus. I am not certain whether it simply named him or actually said "Erastus the city treasurer". It probably was the former, but our guide in Corinth (who was from Athens by the way) said that those gifts were often paid for by the city treasurer. Also, unlike *MacSBNnkjv* she mentioned that "Erastus" was not a common name because it meant "sexy"(Footnote: Literally, "erastus" means "beloved". The meaning within the Greek context is that a person within a gay couple who is the receiver of the penetration or more of the feminine type is called the erastus. This would not have particularly been demeaning and therefore not uncommon.). Now I do not know whether she does not know the exact meaning of what an erastus was, or that she did not want to go into sexual details—I doubt that it was because of a lack of English proficiency, and I would go for the latter, feeling that she avoided topics on sex. But the question still remains whether this was a common name or not. The answer to that might lead to whether the plaque in Corinthians actually belonged to the city treasure mentioned here. 

**Doxology**
*25 Now to him who is able to strengthen you according to my gospel and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the mystery that was kept secret for long ages 26 but has now been disclosed and through the prophetic writings has been made known to all nations, according to the command of the eternal God, to bring about the obedience of faith— 27 to the only wise God be glory forevermore through Jesus Christ! Amen.*

By saying that the only god who is wise is God we give extra glory to God in saying that all the others gods are unwise. Mocking other gods—as Isaiah has done—is a form of praising God. While it is not good to mock believers of those idols, because believers are creations of God and He loves them, those idols are self-made gods who do not exist. In other words, we mock the ideas of others that are not only ridiculous (Mormonism) but harmful (Scientology), hate-inducing (Islam), society and economy destroying (Marxism), unscientific (Hinduism), self-loathing (Buddhism), God-hating (atheism), Satan-loving (Wicca and other witchcrafts), and everything else that eventually only disrupts the peace that God has meant for man and the relationship God wanted with him. #church/material/sermon #tags/ideology/communism #tags/religion/islam #tags/religion/hinduism


#biblestudy/devotionals/romans