# Romans 11 (ESV) 
**The Remnant of Israel**
*1 I ask, then, has God rejected his people? By no means! For I myself am an Israelite, a descendant of Abraham, a member of the tribe of Benjamin. 2 God has not rejected his people whom he foreknew. Do you not know what the Scripture says of Elijah, how he appeals to God against Israel? 3 “Lord, they have killed your prophets, they have demolished your altars, and I alone am left, and they seek my life.” 4 But what is God's reply to him? “I have kept for myself seven thousand men who have not bowed the knee to Baal.” 5 So too at the present time there is a remnant, chosen by grace. 6 But if it is by grace, it is no longer on the basis of works; otherwise grace would no longer be grace.*

So God has not rejected His people, but He has kept a remnant, chosen by grace. It is clear that this remnant consists of the Judahites and some Aaronites, known by the name Cohen. The rest of the eleven tribes have been scattered across the world (see notes in Romans 10).
A small remnant remains, Judah, but out of these Judahites also only a small percentage is saved.
The interesting thing is that the Jews (and by now they are called Jews and not Israelites, because the origin of the word jew means that they are from Judah) who have held on to God's Law, that is the orthodox Jews, are usually not the ones to convert to Christians and become Messianic Jews.
No, it is rather the secular Jews who are guided and chosen by God, which again shows God's grace and not works is what saves man. Examples of these are Michael Brown, Jonathan Caan (though being raised in an orthodox fashion they rebelled and became secular) and Andrew Klavan #tags/famouspeople who wrote extensively about his conversion in his book *the Great Good Thing*. #tags/books

On one hand I am relieved to hear that God has not rejected His people, not all of them at least, on the other hand it is such a big part that has been rejected. Eleven tribes out of twelve, and of this last tribe (or perhaps two, including Benjamin) a part—I do not know how big #todo/opzoeken —remained in Persia among which Daniel and Esther (a Benjaminite). The percentages of secular and orthodox jews are unclear to me as well, let alone the percentage of Messianic Jews. 
But one thing strikes me: why would the name Cohen still be in existence and in quite a number? For there are relatively many famous people whose surname is Cohen, such as former mayor of Amsterdam, the Netherlands, Job Cohen, and the American politician ... Cohan, #todo/opzoeken which would indicate there are even more non-famous people. One thing comes to mind as a possible explanation, which leads to a second explanation of how we have not only Jews from the tribe of Judah.
First, the Levites were assigned cities of refuge among each of the land of the tribes. There were forty cities designated for the Levites, so Benjamin and Judah would have about seven cities full of Levites being deported to Babylon along with them. #todo/opzoeken cf. Joshua 22. Now where do the other Jews come from? At the end of Judges the Benjaminite tribe was almost extinct, except for a couple of hundred Benjaminite #todo/opzoeken  men. They were being told to steal the women of other tribes. I am not sure whether these women were from one tribe only or of multiple tribes. This would explain DNA from other tribes than Judah in present day Jews, but not any surnames. Either way, God created for Himself a remnant which exists of more than only Judahites, but of Benjaminites, Levites and at least one other tribe. 

*7 What then? Israel failed to obtain what it was seeking. The elect obtained it, but the rest were hardened, 8 as it is written,*

The elect obtained it and at the same time the rest were hardened. God does not leave any space in between for people who are not hardened or near believing. See also the notes on verses 27 about partial hardening, which is about temporal hardening and of certain people, but not on an individual level. 
In practice we see, however, that there are people who are close to coming to faith. They are rational and although they might be unwilling to becoming a Christian, they are generally speaking, in human terms, good people. Usually these are people who lack knowledge of what religion is and have many misperceptions that need to get rid of. But what about those who have read more about it? What about people like Ben Shapiro and Dave Rubin? Ben Shapiro would most likely fall under the hardened category, even though he believes in God, is morally righteous and seems to make decisions on a rational base. However, he does not seem to have changed his mind any bit even after speaking with famous Christians such as Ravi Zacharias, William Lane Craig and John MacArthur. #tags/famouspeople

*“God gave them a spirit of stupor,*
*eyes that would not see*
*and ears that would not hear,*
*down to this very day.”*

It is clear that none of the Jews were saved by merit. The Jews despised Jesus and killed Him. Now of course some did not kill Him, like Mary and other women. It is #todo/opzoeken/engels frappant 
to see the it is the women who seem to know more about Jesus' death and resurrection, did not run away and were the ones visit and believe Him first. 
But even besides these women there must have been people who stood up for Him, even one of the Sanhedrin stood up and said that there was no evidence against Him, at least not enough to indict and prosecute Him. 
These people, no matter how righteous, still fall under grace, not only in the sense that it is impossible to remain sinless one's whole life and that Jesus therefore had to pay with His life for ours, but also being part of remnant to be saved. 

Now the remnant is, as mentioned before, the part of the people saved by salvation, part of the people who returned from Persia, part of the tribes who were taken in captive to Babylon, part of country that had not been taken by the Assyrians and dispersed, part of those who had been kept alive or who survived. 

*9 And David says,*
*“Let their table become a snare and a trap,*
*a stumbling block and a retribution for them;*
*10 let their eyes be darkened so that they cannot see,*
*and bend their backs forever.”*

As mentioned, the elect were given eyes to see while the rest was made blind. Would that not be unfair? Suppose the whole world was not blind but merely had their eyes closed. Would it not be unfair then to say that God would open the eyes of some and forever close or blind those who did want to open their eyes? The latter is exactly the point. The people have always had the choice to open their eyes if they had wanted to. Of course they did not, for none wanted to (cf. Romans 3:10-17). Is that then not unfair, that no man is inherently capable of opening or wanting to open his eyes? No, still that is a righteous act. For indeed, it is because man is born out of a sinful person who in turn was born out of sin, up until Adam and Eve. But it is not merely our ancestor's fault for if we had been in that position, we would have listened to the snake, eaten of the forbidden fruit and sinned as well. So our *inherent* sin might as well be called *our* sin. 
So concluding, we can see that the fact none of us inherently wants to open our eyes is *our own choice*. Now to answer our first question, is it not unfair to take this capability away to ever open our eyes by blinding us, or as Paul says it, to *harden* our hearts? In the eyes of man it seems unfair because we think there is always a *possibility* that man would open his eyes, but God does not work with possibilities, rather He only knows of certainties. He knows which man will ever open his eyes and which man will not. Therefore, if He takes away one's sight, it would not matter anyway in hindsight (no pun intended). #church/material And for those whose eyes He opens, it is a gift, by grace, as is everything from God, to see the truth and accept it. 
What do we say then of people like Bart Ehrman and Michael Shermer, were they not on the right path before they wandered off? Perhaps they were. I would say that these persons received the grace to open their eyes for a short time, but then closed their eyes to the truth because they had preferred seeing their own truth. God told Shermer (most likely and if I remember correctly) that what He did was righteous, even if people were killed and if anything unrighteous should happen, it is not Him but the Satan who did it. Why God let the Satan go His way, is because He knows better what will happen in the end and because He is sovereign. We should not impose our definition of righteousness on God. *Righteousness* is but a human-made word, the concept of it is heavenly and encompasses more than a human dictionary could contain—let us say it is situation specific, so it would be impossible to define righteousness for every situation. So Shermer could not live with the fact that God's definition was different and broader than his'—or no one explained it to him, but that would then also mean that God did not extend His grace to him by sending him a discipler who could teach him this—which means he was not able to reconcile the atrocities on Earth with God's almight and righteousness, unless God is not almighty or righteous. 
Not being *able* to reconcile something is one thing, it is another thing, however, to turn your back on God. There are many Christians who have not been able to reconcile this difficult question of life. As Ravi Zacharias #tags/famouspeople mentioned, it is one of the most asked questions during the Frequently Asked Questions part after his talks. Even though Zacharias has a verbal answer to this question, he understands that it is difficult to comprehend. But what we should always do, is give God the benefit of the doubt and put ourselves under Him, acknowledge that He is wiser and mightier still. It would be the only logical thing to do as well. For even if one does not believe God is almighty or righteous and that His creation has gotten out of hand, He still is more powerful than all of us and could at least control our lives. Especially when a god is unrighteous it would be wise to follow him, for what would this unrighteous god do with your life when he finds out you are not following him anymore, like the Egyptian or Canaanite gods did? He would be like a mob or maffia boss would punish you for leaving the group (which is unrighteous). So the fact that you dare to turn your back on God and that you have not been punished for it only means you acknowledge His gentleness and righteousness.
Now Shermer explicitly claims God does not exist and it appears from his debate with Lawrence Krauss against Dinesh D'Souza that his falling away #todo/opzoeken/engels tegenovergestelde van bekeren 
is based on emotions which is made even more clear when he shows his understanding of people who experience miracles or even God Himself are not lying—He even seems to be open to the results of miracles that have happened in history, such as people being healed from cancer, provided that they are natural phenomena which simply have not been explained yet. Ehrman on the other hand does not make this claim and does not even say anything about it in his famous debate with William Lane Craig about the resurrection of Jesus Christ, when Craig mentions this fact (that Ehrman has never denied that God exists). Craig also mentions in his [opening](https://www.reasonablefaith.org/media/debates/is-there-historical-evidence-for-the-resurrection-of-jesus-the-craig-ehrman/) that Ehrman "abandoned his Christian faith" after his studies due to the issue of errancy of the Bible, which he thinks—I presume—must be *inerrant* before he could believe in it or in the author of it. 
This, however, is also a proof of putting oneself over God. Just like Shermer was unwilling to accept a truth from God and that his truth had to be right one, so Ehrman is unwilling to accept that God could allow errors to exist in the Bible and that *his* claim of a perfect God should not only be able, but also should create a perfect Bible, should be true. Once again the fallacy is made here of imposing our definitions over God's sovereignty and—even leaving God's sovereignty aside—His infinite wisdom. One reason why God could have left errors in the Bible is because He did not want to restrict people of their free will. It is an enormously hard job to maintain free will and maintain the Bible. As has been told in a few legends or stories, when the protagonist of the story had hidden his treasure in a tree trunk marked with a handkerchief knotted to a branch and made his enemy promise he would not remove the handkerchief, the enemy would spend the whole night knotting the same type of handkerchiefs on other tree trunks so that the protagonist could not find the original anymore. In the same way God has protected His Word and put a curse on those who added or removed any word from it, be it from Revelations or (as most interpret it) for the whole Bible, and perhaps those people have actually been cursed, but the fact is that there multiple versions of the Bible. What God could do then, is to at least let His people know which version is true. 
A simple god would then point to a specific version and letting His Holy Spirit speak to those who have authority on Earth to indicate the correct version or the erroneous verses. Our God, however, is more complex and has a better way, and tells us which parts of the fakes Bible are wrong and why they are wrong, and which parts have been added but are allowed to stay in because they have been added with good intentions and make the text clearer (for future generations for example). This makes its authenticity harder to trace, for example when in Moses' books in Numbers #todo/opzoeken there is written that Moses is the most humble or meek man in the world, which most obviously a meek person would never write of himself, but it does make clear why Moses did not speak against Aaron and Maryam.
This is merely an explanation, but it shows that there is a much greater truth behind what humans can think of. 
Perhaps a fun fact to know, is that Ehrman [writes](https://ehrmanblog.org/ehrman-vs-craig-evidence-for-resurrection) of this debate, ten years later, that "maybe" Craig did mop him up. I hope he has gained some insight after reading the transcript of his debate to see that he did not answer Craig's arguments and misses some of the strong arguments made by him due to his strong focus on bringing down the resurrection instead of being critical of the truth. 
Without knowing I have commented on verse 8-10. The religious and Biblical critics Shermer and Ehrman have blinded themselves and put a snare and trap for themselves with their arguments against a living and almighty God.

**Gentiles Grafted In**
*11 So I ask, did they stumble in order that they might fall? By no means! Rather, through their trespass salvation has come to the Gentiles, so as to make Israel jealous. 12 Now if their trespass means riches for the world, and if their failure means riches for the Gentiles, how much more will their full inclusion mean!*
*13 Now I am speaking to you Gentiles. Inasmuch then as I am an apostle to the Gentiles, I magnify my ministry 14 in order somehow to make my fellow Jews jealous, and thus save some of them. 15 For if their rejection means the reconciliation of the world, what will their acceptance mean but life from the dead? 16 If the dough offered as firstfruits is holy, so is the whole lump, and if the root is holy, so are the branches.*
*17 But if some of the branches were broken off, and you, although a wild olive shoot, were grafted in among the others and now share in the nourishing root of the olive tree, 18 do not be arrogant toward the branches. If you are, remember it is not you who support the root, but the root that supports you. 19 Then you will say, “Branches were broken off so that I might be grafted in.” 20 That is true. They were broken off because of their unbelief, but you stand fast through faith. So do not become proud, but fear. 21 For if God did not spare the natural branches, neither will he spare you. 22 Note then the kindness and the severity of God: severity toward those who have fallen, but God's kindness to you, provided you continue in his kindness. Otherwise you too will be cut off. 23 And even they, if they do not continue in their unbelief, will be grafted in, for God has the power to graft them in again.* 

Note once more that Paul does not say that if the Jews continue with their good works that they will be grafted in again, but only when they do not continue their *unbelief*, that is not of works but of mere faith in God. 
What, then, does this mean for the Gentiles who have left the faith, can they be grafted in again? We have established above that this chapter does not contradict the *Once Saved Always Saved* principle. The Gentiles were grafted in, indeed, but it is the fruit, i.e. the result, that shows whether they have truly been grafted in. #biblestudy/theology/calvinism/osas
My father, for example, "grafted" branches from other trees onto his apple tree, but using ropes and tape. Of course this did not work, because the inside of the branches were not connecting in the right way with the trunk. 
On the other hand, even if a branch connects correctly, it can still die because of other reasons, perhaps certain trees are not compatible or require the right season or temperature. When the branches have been grafted in and when the inside of the branches intertwine and the branches become one with the root, however, then the branches will not die as long as the root is strong. 
#todo/opzoeken waar staat het stuk over mensen die het geloof verlaten hebben en dat ze niet meer kunnen terugkomen? Dat kan toch niet, want iedereen kan toch komen? Terugkomen zou per definitie niet moeten bestaan, omdat iemand niet kan afvallen van het geloof. 
Maar "terug" komen in de zin van "iemand is al een keer erin gegraveerd, maar het was de vorige keer niet gelukt", in zo'n geval zal God het niet nogmaals proberen—dit zou de betekenis van dat vers kunnen zijn.

*24 For if you were cut from what is by nature a wild olive tree, and grafted, contrary to nature, into a cultivated olive tree, how much more will these, the natural branches, be grafted back into their own olive tree.*

The Jews, however, will be grafted into their own tree. They differ from the Gentiles, first of all, because they are God's children. It would not be unfair for God to take back His children after He has abandoned them temporarily from His home. A father can do to His own children as he likes, especially God the Father. On the other hand, even though these branches are originals, from the root of Jesus Christ, they had never borne fruit. So in that sense they are not actually grafted "back" into the tree, for the first time they were like dead branches being grafted in the wrong way.  

**The Mystery of Israel's Salvation**
*25 Lest you be wise in your own sight, I do not want you to be unaware of this mystery, brothers: a partial hardening has come upon Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles has come in. 26 And in this way all Israel will be saved, as it is written,*
*“The Deliverer will come from Zion,*
*he will banish ungodliness from Jacob”;*
*27 “and this will be my covenant with them*
*when I take away their sins.”* 

Because the Jews did not listen, the Gospel was spread to and received by the Gentiles. But God gave the Jews only a *partial* hardening. Partial in the sense that only a part of the Israelites were hardened, and in the sense that of those hardened, one part (which is, I think, all tribes except for Judah and Benjamin) was completely hardened—perhaps irreversible—and another was only partially hardened. 
Another interpretation is that this concerns Israel as a whole. The part that is hardened has been completely hardened, regardless of the tribes, and some have been elected in order to be saved. 
Also, Paul clearly says that this partial hardening is of a temporal sense, it is only *until* the Gentiles have reached their fullness—which probably means the moment when the people that God has elected have converted—that God wil unharden the hearts of the Jewish or Israelite people. In the case of non-Judahite people, they will need to hear the Gospel first. It is striking to see that the Judahites and Benjaminites are highly educated and though poor are still very civilized. The other tribes that have been found, scattered all over the world, are living in bushes or as shepherds, do not even know they are Jewish or know about God. 
I once heard from a minister about Jews being discovered in Iraq who did not know they were Jewish. It appeared then that after the Second World War #tags/historic events/wwii# they escaped to the Middle-East and the Muslims let them live there in peace, provided they would become Muslims. They then did not command the Laws of God anymore and did not teach their children to obey the Lord Yahweh of Israel (cf. Deuteronomy 5). Perhaps this is also what Paul refers to when he mentions the "unbelief" of the Jews (cf. verses 20, 23). 

*28 As regards the gospel, they are enemies for your sake. But as regards election, they are beloved for the sake of their forefathers.*

Paul is speaking of the Jewish people when he uses "they". The non-Messianic Jews are indeed the enemies of the gospel for the proclaim their own gospel of the Law and think that that will save them. Some Christians I know have been pulled a little backwards by the Jews. They admire the Jews so much, like I do as well, because they are God's children, blessed with intelligence and a plethora of talents in all arts and sciences. These Christians I know have then stopped eating pork and have started eating kosher food. Fortunately they have not been changed in their thinking related to the Gospel. 
Regarding election, however, we should be grateful of the jews. It is because of them that we are saved. Not because of their merit, but because they were crucial in God's plan to save humanity. Also, they are beloved by God, so we should love them. #biblestudy/theology/predestination/election
In this time there is not a lot of respect for whom or where you are from, only for who you are. This is good in some sense, a person should be judged by his merit and character, not for his 
#todo/opzoeken/engels stand (van adel bijvoorbeeld) or incluence. 
 On the other hand, however, it is important that we realize that whom a person is from, or sent by, is also the one whom we should fear. A messenger sent by a king should be treated better than when he were sent by a farmer, when one fears the king more than the farmer. 
So the Jews themselves we do not fear, but their Father we should, and those who have not, have seen the consequences of that. 

*29 For the gifts and the calling of God are irrevocable. 30 For just as you were at one time disobedient to God but now have received mercy because of their disobedience, 31 so they too have now been disobedient in order that by the mercy shown to you they also may now receive mercy. 32 For God has consigned all to disobedience, that he may have mercy on all.*

God is merciful to us, that is one thing that is certain from these verses. 
When He gives something to someone it is irrevocable. One cannot give it to someone else or throw it away. God had called the Israelites to be a light to the nations, they were not, and so God has send the Christians to be that, but it does not mean the Israelites can now rest and let the Christians do the work. Their calling is still the same and will always be.
Their gift is what they have received with which they can put their calling in practice. It includes riches, fame, wealth and intelligence—as I have earlier noted of Jews, even though there are many poor ones as well. Their gift, even though they are using it for bad purposes—Jewish Hollywood actors like Natalie Portman, Barbra Streisand and Jewish politicians such as Michael Bloomberg and Bernie Sanders promote Leftist ideologies, to name but a few #tags/famouspeople , is not taken away from them, exactly because of this reason: it is irrevocable. 

#todo/opzoeken Number of Jewish people in the Avengers (except for three)
Mark Ruffalo? 

What should we say then of the gift of eternal life? Is that gift not greater? Should it then not be even more irrevocable? Yes, the gift itself is irrevocable for sure, but it can be used for the wrong purpose, that is no condition. #biblestudy/theology/calvinism/osas
However, do note that the consequence of the gift of eternal life is the Holy Spirit and that God promises us that it is the Holy Spirit Who will work in us (cf. Philippians 1:6, Matthew 28:18, #todo/opzoeken  waar nog meer?) and change us. so if anyone were to misuse his gift of eternal life, would God then not be keeping His promise? This rhetoric question must be answered with *yes*, but some may say that person still has free will, even when in possession of the Holy Spirit. That is true, but the free will we have before and after obtaining the Holy Spirit is different. Before we had it, we would use it in a selfish way. Paul clearly says that although he is allowed to do everything, not everything is beneficial and therefore he will not do everything. (#todo/opzoeken  referentie)
Anyone who keeps sinning therefore proves that he does not have the Holy Spirit (#todo/opzoeken  referentie)
Also, God has set the condition for receiving eternal life, which is to have the Son, Jesus Christ, which means of course that one should love Him (cf. 1 John 5:13) and if anyone love Jesus he would not keep sinning against Him and misuse this gift. 
What then about people who do not love Jesus anymore? They might have loved Jesus in the beginning, received the Holy Spirit, which they cannot discard anymore, and then misuse this gift? If that were the case, the Holy Spirit would continue knocking on the door of their hearts (#todo/opzoeken not Rev. 3:20 but where?) and speak to their conscience, #todo/opzoeken/engels aanklagen
and it *would* have effect for God is all-powerful. 
Would it not be ironic if God were all powerful, yet He could does not even have the freedom to give only loyal people eternal life, especially because He gave them free will? This of course is a rhetorical question and the answer is *yes, it is ironic* but it is not true. God is by no means compelled #todo/opzoeken/engels gedwongen to give people eternal life just because they love Him for only a short period. God did not make the promise to give everyone the free gift of grace in order to regret it later on. No, when He makes a promise He will think clearly about it. Granted, the following contains a little but of speculating with human logic, but it is most intuitive that He either chooses those who really love Him and will continue loving Him the rest of His life, just like when one chooses his bride, or that He will help those who start stopping loving Him to love Him more. 

*33 Oh, the depth of the riches and wisdom and knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his judgments and how inscrutable his ways!*
*34 “For who has known the mind of the Lord,*
*or who has been his counselor?”*
*35 “Or who has given a gift to him*
*that he might be repaid?”* 
*36 For from him and through him and to him are all things. To him be glory forever. Amen.*

As mentioned, there was some speculation in my explanation on my definitive position #todo/opzoeken/engels standpunt on the theory of *Once Saved, Always Saved*. Verses 33 and further emphasize that the depth of God's knowledge is even inscrutable. God would know about subjects we never even thought of, let alone name the contents. 
We think we have covered every subject on the current world, for what would be smaller than quarks, but even within the subject matter of the present time, God could show things we have never seen. Even the simplest cell has not even been thorough searched through; Even the cracking of fingers cannot be explained by current medicine! 

#biblestudy/devotionals/romans

