# Romans 6 (ESV) 
**Dead to Sin, Alive to God**
*1 What shall we say then? Are we to continue in sin that grace may abound? 2 By no means! How can we who died to sin still live in it?*

The image I have when reading this verse is that of an organ that has died to our body. Our bodies naturally resist anything that is external, even if it is human, but from another person. That is why organ transplants often #todo/opzoeken  how often? fail. 
I do not interpret verse 1 in such a way that I see sin as an organ that died and now has been removed. Rather yet, I see us as the healthy organ in the body of sin, and we have died to it and we have removed from it. But just like in real life a part of healthy tissue is cut away along with the dead tissue, so a part of this sinful body is attached to us, the dead organ. 

*3 Do you not know that all of us who have been baptized into Christ Jesus were baptized into his death?*

Now the image continues, but now it is like the worldview of the Christians but the opposite of it. I mean by that, there is a worldview where people worship the Satan as their god, and their heaven is hell. Some people fall of the path and end up in Christianity, never to return to their path again. 
In Christianity of course it is the other way around, where we say that some people are on the wrong side or path, and some of those do end up on the good side. Those on the good side, however, always stay on the good side and never fall off the path to the wrong side. Those who have "fallen" are those who were on the bad side and were *trying* to reach the good side, but failed to do so. It is like a cliff. On the slope it is still possible to fall, but once you are on the cliff, you are safe. 
Now these worlds co-exist on Earth simultaneously, let's say they are bad-Earth and good-Earth. Once a person has died to bad-Earth, he will enter a semi heaven-like state, although that is much overrated for no matter how good things get on Earth, they will not even approach 1% of what heaven is, although it still is much better than what bad-Earth is. 
Suppose we were in heaven, would we then long for good-Earth? No, we would not, because we would be fully clean then, without any memory to remind us of good-Earth. But now we are in good-Earth, we are still not fully clean yet, and we still have traces of bad-Earth which remind us of our old life. And just as illogical it is for the prostitute who was loved by the prophet Hosea still ran away from him and returned to the business she did not want to be in, in the same way it is illogical for us to return to our old realm where there is no reward except death, and even in life itself there is no reward except for pain—all the while while our heavenly reward is right in front of us. 

*4 We were buried therefore with him by baptism into death, in order that, just as Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, we too might walk in newness of life.*

As referred to in Romans 5 we are now part of the spiritual realm of the living. This is where sin is condemned, and where grace is reigning. Why would we sin? It is utterly useless. It is counterproductive. Does it make one feel better?—not in this realm. It makes one realize how sinful he is. It does not bring any rewards. It makes one regress to the place where he came from. At least in the realm of the dead to sin was cool. But sinning in the realm of the living makes you an outsider. There is no logic to sin in this realm except the love for oneself, and it our *self* that we need to die to. 
This is what Paul means when he writes in verse 3 that we have been baptized in Jesus' death. As soon as we die, we will have a new life—one in which we have completely died to our sinful self. But right now we are not dead yet, we have only been baptized in Jesus' death. We have chosen our path and this is on Jesus' death. And just as time goes forward without a chance to go back, so the only way we can move forward is on this path that Jesus paved for us, in the realm of the living. 
Now it sounds like we were forced to walk onto this path, but it is actually the other way around. We were begging for this path, because the path of the dead, which leads to hell, was the path we were walking on ever since we were born. That did not satisfy us and in our pain we cried out to God to save us from all the pain that is here on Earth. 

*5 For if we have been united with him in a death like his, we shall certainly be united with him in a resurrection like his. 6 We know that our old self was crucified with him in order that the body of sin might be brought to nothing, so that we would no longer be enslaved to sin. 7 For one who has died has been set free from sin.*

It is true that we have been set free from sin. We now have the possibility to break with our addictions and bad habits. It requires discipline and power but most of all a choice. We have this choice, because God requires freedom, even after having made the choice to follow God. We now need to experience what this choice entails and show (not for Him but to ourselves) how we deal with the consequences of being a Christian. 

*8 Now if we have died with Christ, we believe that we will also live with him.*

Normally, if you die with someone, it does not mean you will live with that person as well. Suppose you are in the army and you decide to die together in battle with your brothers or in capital punishment by the enemy. If any of you survive, however, it does not mean that the others will as well. 
What this verse refers to is sharing of experiences, pain and effort. Usually when several people start working on a project together, those who succeed, will then also share their success with their co-founders. See for example the stories of self-made billionaires Bill Gates (Microsoft), Mark Zuckerberg (Facebook) and Jack Ma (from Alibaba). Of course, in practice this principle does not always work out and some people may be left out of the profits, which was shown in the motion picture *The Social Network* although it must be mentioned that there is (a lack of) scrutiny concerning the authenticity of that script. #tags/movies
But in Jesus' case, He rewards us. We die with Him and *when* He raises, for He surely will, He will bring us from the dead as well and He will let us reign with Him. 

*9 We know that Christ, being raised from the dead, will never die again; death no longer has dominion over him. 10 For the death he died he died to sin, once for all, but the life he lives he lives to God.*

Jesus' resurrection is special in that sense that His death was only once. Of course, this does not apply to others. Lazarus and others who have been raised from the dead died again, because they rose with their regular bodies. Jesus on the other hand was never man until His incarnation. Now if His human body died, would Jesus then be died? Of course not. His soul would ever be alive as it always had been. That in itself, however, could not be called a resurrection, for a resurrection requires someone to die first. Also, it was not a resurrection by a third person, for then Jesus would have been healed just like Lazarus had been, in a regular body. 
No, His resurrection was of a different order. Jesus resurrected by His own power, limited to a purely human nature. Did He fight the devil? He did not need to, the devil was speechless before the throne of the Judge, God the Father, and could not even use a single fact of what happened in Jesus' life to accuse him. The Satan knew that Jesus was innocent and so did the Father. That would have been the fastest court hearing in "history" (although there is no concept of time in heaven) and directly after His death, Jesus would as much as skip court, go to heaven, preach to the generation of Noah (cf. #todo/opzoeken ) #todo nog af te maken

All of this would have taken less than a second, because no time exists outside of our realm, yet Jesus took three days before returning to Earth. Why? #todo/opzoeken 
But now, Jesus Christ would have a glorified body—albeit with scars on at least His hands and perhaps His side as well—and would never die again. 
Now how do we know He will never die again? Except for the fact that He now has an imperishable glorified body, it is the word "dominion" that explains it here. Death might still exist, but it has no *dominion* over Him. 
Why? The answer is written in verse 10. Jesus died to sin. The word "to" can be read as "because of" or "due to", it should be interpreted as a indirect object (dative) and "sin" is a noun here, not a verb, just like "I propose to you."
Jesus could not die a second time to sin, because the first time He died, He already died to all sin there ever was. 
Now if anyone were to sin again, one would say that Jesus had not died yet for that single sin, but that is not the case here. Jesus died for all sins—of the past and the future. 
So now, He will never die anymore, and the life He lives now, is to God. 
Whenever sin is still a factor, we can never be sure what intention one has. When one gives money to charity, is it to God that he gives, or partially to his own ego, to gain compliments or stature, in other words, to sin? 
Jesus has died to sin, all that was in Him has already died to sin, like every part that is not gold, will melt in the furnace, and that which is not gold, cannot burn. Now Jesus was pure and therefore—in our analogy—not flammable, but because He took upon Him our sin, which is highly inflammable, He burned and suffered, and not just a little like when you would put a napkin on your hand and burn the napkin, but it is like He were packed inside mountains and mountains of paper and He had to suffer until all of that was burned. 
Is that the reason why it took three days for Him until everything was burned? No. The suffering is not expressed in time nor is time a factor in suffering. Suffering in hell takes place outside the realm of time, space and matter, but for Jesus, His suffering was on the cross where human suffering was present during the hours Jesus was on the cross and superhuman suffering occurred at the very last moment when He spoke out His very last words: "*Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachtani?*" (Father, Father, why hast Thou forsaken Me?) accompanied with a cry—that was the moment when all of history's, present and future sin would all accumulate and put on Jesus Who then paid the price for it.  
Back to where we were. We now know that Jesus can never die again, because Jesus paid for all sin. Could it then be that a sinner could tell the devil that he does not have to pay for his sins, because Jesus already paid for it? If this sinner were to be punished, the double amount of punishment would have been distributed, once for the sinner and once for Jesus, which is not just. Would the devil accept this reasoning? Of course not! He is a liar and a proponent if not the founder of injustice. It would be up to the court justice, which is God the Father, to decide. He would listen, but He already has His answer ready: "Did you accept the mercy I gave You?"

*11 So you also must consider yourselves dead to sin and alive to God in Christ Jesus.*

Now the *hina*-clause #todo/opzoeken/greek used here follows from the fact Jesus now lives His life to God. Why should we then do what verse 11 dictates? Should it not say "may" instead "must"? 
Logically, one would interpret the context as follows. Jesus has paid the price for all sin and died for that, opening by that action a "portal"—if you will"—for us to enter the Kingdom of Heaven—not yet Heaven itself, for that is where we will go to after our life, but here on this world, on Earth, access to the *Kingdom* of Heaven (see notes on .... #todo/opzoeken  eerder uitgelegd?), as explained in verse 3 through the "baptism into His death." 
Now if we are pass through that portal into the realm of the living, where sin neither has the effect of binding us or giving us pleasure, then there all will strive to live for the good—as one can empirically see in the fact that ... see Keep notes. #todo nog af te maken

*12 Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body, to make you obey its passions. 13 Do not present your members to sin as instruments for unrighteousness, but present yourselves to God as those who have been brought from death to life, and your members to God as instruments for righteousness.* 

Even though we—or our souls—are in this realm of the living, our bodies are not and they are still mortal and fleshly. That is why we still feel worldly feelings, such as hunger and sleep, but also more than just the things we need, such as power and lust. Now our bodies are pulling us towards the realm of the dead, but we cannot discard our bodies yet. We should not ignore it either, for it is the way for us to communicate with people from the realm of the dead, for our souls cannot enter that—and that is a good thing! 
Our bodies are not only to communicate, but also to exemplify. We show a good example of how the Christian life is, along with all of its suffering, by showing how good our God is. The members of our bodies, our arms and our mouth for example, should therefore also be good examples of the Christian life. They should be used for the good, to help people, not to fight or to scold. 
Our bodies are still connected to our soul and can even make it dirty by making it one with a prostitute for example, #todo/opzoeken waar? 1 Corinthians ? 
But Christians should have the power from Jesus to refrein from these things (cf. 1 Corinthians 10:13). This is very debatable however, as I see more and more leaders having fallen into sexual sin, such as ... West (almost pastor of a megachurch) who as a youth pastor had sex with two of his students, and John Crist, but both of them repented of their sin. The latter did not actually had sex and the former was still young and perhaps not a believer yet back then (and maybe he still is not). So would any Christian, real Christians that is, ever go as far to have unlawful sex with another person, even when they have the power from Jesus Christ to control their bodily urges? The answer is "no". Even Joseph Prince said in an article with Dr. Brown that such as person is not under grace, or in other words, not saved. 

*14 For sin will have no dominion over you, since you are not under law but under grace.*

This latter is what I have noticed in practice. Sin does not have a dominion over me. In the past addictions and bad (social) habits were something I was controlled by and could not change. Aggression and hot-temperedness for example, were two of those habits. But now, though I still sin in these fields, I feel that when I fall back into these sins or habits, it is because I choose to do it or to allow it. God has already freed me from the addiction, and put me in a safe position, but I allow myself to be exposed to this sin. 

**Slaves to Righteousness**
*15 What then? Are we to sin because we are not under law but under grace? By no means! 16 Do you not know that if you present yourselves to anyone as obedient slaves, you are slaves of the one whom you obey, either of sin, which leads to death, or of obedience, which leads to righteousness?*

Paul is using rhetoric here and posing the obvious question. Of course none should sin on purpose when we are not under the law. This would not satisfy us, as the previous verses have already concluded. However, Paul uses another argument. When we sin, we are obedient to sin. The devil did not force us to sin, but we willingly did it. When we do it in an obedient way, we acknowledge that sin is our master, and having sin as your master will lead to death. 
Christians, on the other hand, would not willingly sin, but reluctantly, for we know what is good, but we do not do it. This shows that we are slaves of obedience to God, for when there is something good we need to do, we willingly do it. 
The wicked, however, have trouble doing good things, as we can see in so many depictions of antagonists, such as Ed Harris in *National Treasure 2*, who did a good thing at the end, but really had to force himself to do so. #tags/movies 

*17 But thanks be to God, that you who were once slaves of sin have become obedient from the heart to the standard of teaching to which you were committed, 18 and, having been set free from sin, have become slaves of righteousness. 19 I am speaking in human terms, because of your natural limitations. For just as you once presented your members as slaves to impurity and to lawlessness leading to more lawlessness, so now present your members as slaves to righteousness leading to sanctification.*

In verse 19 Paul describes how parts of our body were not only exposed to sin, but also leading us to more lawlessness. A hand that is used in violence to beat someone to steal money for example, is also feeding the soul with power and greed for money. But now that our souls have been cleansed and forgiven, we can use our hands for the good and thereby feed our souls with good things. Helping people for example would teach us endurance, perseverance and character, eventually leading us to ever more sanctification. 

*20 For when you were slaves of sin, you were free in regard to righteousness.* 

I am not sure if I understand verse 20 completely, but it says that we were free, but only in regard to righteousness. I think it means that we were free within a certain scope, just like one is free in his conscience to do all he wants, whereas after we have been set free from sin, we are not. But what does it mean then that we were free in regard to righteousness? Is it not that righteousness will always prevail, for the those under the law and those under grace (albeit that in the latter case justice will take place on Jesus of those on Christians)? I suppose that is not the meaning. 
The meaning rather is that the only thing they were free of was righteousness in that sense that they would not receive it. Sinners do not get the righteousness they deserve. Why not? The crux is in the definition of the word "righteousness". Basically it means that the righteous people get their rewards for being righteous or good, and the unrighteous will receive punishment for their deed, but here and elsewhere in Romans "righteousness" refers to the part that is due to the righteous people. So with that in mind—if it is true—it means that the slaves of sin are free from rewards—which is not a good thing at all. It is like telling an employee he can do all he wants, he is free—but he is also free from his salary. 

*21 But what fruit were you getting at that time from the things of which you are now ashamed? For the end of those things is death. 22 But now that you have been set free from sin and have become slaves of God, the fruit you get leads to sanctification and its end, eternal life. ::23 For the wages of sin is death, but the free gift of God is eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord.*:: #biblestudy/memorization

The answer to this question is obvious: we were getting nothing from that for which we are now ashamed. All my pride in the number of girls has led me to a sex addiction for which I am ashamed now—I think that is the main thing I am ashamed of. I am ashamed of the money I spent as well. Instead of working hard at a job and saving money, and working hard at my studies to quickly go through it, I slacked—not only because of a girlfriend I had—but also for failing to see the importance of money, the stewardship of it, that loaning puts me more under slavery of it, and the indulgence and sloth it led to in not cooking my meals myself, wasting time on watching *manga* and a plethora of other things. 
I was not free back then, but I am now. I still have a few of those things mentioned above, and perhaps I have even gained a few new things, but the difference is that I am ashamed of it now. I know it is bad, but I cannot control myself, because I am weak in the flesh. My spirit wants to do the good thing, but I too often surrender to my flesh.
So now, I sanctify my body and spirit by doing the things I am not ashamed for, which are the things that are accepted in Gods kingdom. All these "wages" from sin—which are in fact debts—have been paid by Jesus Christ, but the Earthly wages I have left are huge financial debts, which I need to pay off every month for the coming twelve years—but is *nothing* compared to what God has saved me from.


#biblestudy/devotionals/romans