# Matthew 10 (ESV) 
***The Twelve Apostles***
*1 And he called to him his twelve disciples and gave them authority over unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal every disease and every affliction. 2 The names of the twelve apostles are these: first, Simon, who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother; James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother; 3 Philip and Bartholomew; Thomas and Matthew the tax collector; James the son of Alphaeus, and Thaddaeus; 4 Simon the Zealot, and Judas Iscariot, who betrayed him.*

***Jesus Sends Out the Twelve Apostles***
*5 These twelve Jesus sent out, instructing them, “Go nowhere among the Gentiles and enter no town of the Samaritans, 6 but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.*

It was not the time yet for the Gentiles and the Samaritans to hear about the Gospel, this was reserved first for the Jews (see Romans 1:16). It is a pity that many of the Jews do not know this verse. Do they know that there is a religion that is focused on reaching them first? There is not a single religion that focuses on an ethnicity. Buddhism, though originating from India, is not focused on reaching the Indians first, neither is Islam focused on the Arabs, Taoism on the Chinese or Hinduism on Indians. 
The latter does need a comment. The word "India" is derived from the same word as Hindu and many Hindus in India want to unite the Hindu religion and state laws and allow for punishment of apostates and evangelism of Christians to Hindus. That, however, is not in the writings of Hinduism (as far as I know #todo/opzoeken ).
Only in Judaism is the ethnicity of importance to becoming a child of the Father, with the exception that others are welcome as long as they circumcise—if they are a man, although there is no sign of Naaman (see 2 Kings 5) having been circumcised—and accept God's Law. That too, however, is not a matter of ethnicity, but a matter of accepting God's Law and its mild exclusivity was meant as a protection for a relatively small group of people who were very prone to wander off the right path, by keeping it from being influenced from a plethora of pagan and occult influx through intercultural and interreligious marriages. 
The first Christians and Christianity itself on the other hand really have a commission to go out into the world and reach first the Israelites and then the other nations (see Matthew 28:18-20, Acts 1:8). Christians are actually being told by Paul to keep praying for the Israelites c.q. Jews (see Romans 10:1-2). What an honor this is for the Jewish people!
Moreover, how many Jewish Christians have not died in pursuit of converting their brothers in the first century, as Luke describes in his Book of Acts? Even their last words, when they could have saved themselves, they dedicated to converting the Jews. Stephen asked for forgiveness for the Jews and Paul used one of his last public words to the Jews to tell them to repent and accept Jesus in Acts 22. 
Alas, most Jews did not and still do not realize this. Some Jews know the heart that present-day Christians have for Jews, even when they are not related by blood, as Paul and Stephen were, but only because of Jesus' command and because of their relationship with God the Father, Who is also the Father of the Israelites. I have read once that Christians donate more to Jewish foundations than Jews themselves (but perhaps that was for a specific foundation and in a specific year). 

*7 And proclaim as you go, saying, The kingdom of heaven is at hand.’ 8 Heal the sick, raise the dead, cleanse lepers, cast out demons. ::You received without paying; give without pay::.*

Jesus is explicitly telling—I would even say *commanding*—His disciples not to receive money for healing people or for any other miracles. First of all, this gift with which they could perform miracles was not theirs, second of all the people were mostly poor people who were desperate. To poor people any amount would have an significant impact and desperate as they are, they would be willing to pay that amount as well. A Christian should not make use of a person's desperate situation. Rather, healing those who are sick, dead or possessed, should be a moral obligation. 
Doctors in these days still say the [Hippocratic Oath](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hippocratic_Oath), something invented by the Greek and used by the West. Eastern doctors do not have this oath and charge a handsome amount of money for their services. Unfortunately, this oath has come to mean less and less now doctors assist in killing babies through abortion and adults through euthanasia, and assist in mental dysphoria in transsexual surgeries instead of helping them to feel better by knowing the truth—and coincidentally these are the doctors who probably make most of the money. 
So doctors who do ignore their Hippocratic Oath and make people more mentally ill and even kill people, make more money than doctors who do not. Where is the logic in that? The logic is that the world works in the opposite direction of what God does because it rebels against Him. 

*9 Acquire no gold or silver or copper for your belts, 10 no bag for your journey, or two tunics or sandals or a staff, for ::the laborer deserves his food::.*

Jesus told His disciples here they should not be afraid of the cold of the night (hence the two tunics), hunger or need (hence the money to buy food with) or long distances that need to be walked over treacherous or mountainous trails (hence the mention of a spare pair of sandals and a staff). All of these will not be needed for *this* specific journey, commission or assignment. Implicitly He is saying that God will provide for these, but explicitly He also says that the *laborer*, that is the one who *works*, will deserve or get his food. So if one works hard, God will make sure one finds a resting place and have enough food to eat. 

*11 And whatever town or village you enter, ::find out who is worthy in it:: and stay there until you depart.*

Is this not a clear indication that not everyone has been chosen by God? Those who are not worthy are those who are not willing to listen to the Gospel, but on a deeper level, they do not want to hear the Gospel because they do not long to hear it and they do not long to hear it because God has closed their hearts, because He has not chosen them. 
The theory of election #biblestudy/theology/predestination/election is a very controversial theological subject within the Church and at least a few denominations have branched off because of differences in views concerning this. However, I do not know whether churches split due to a difference in their theological view or because of their emotions. Most people I know who are proponents of the view where God has called everyone, but where not everyone responds to God's call, do not accept a God Who does not accept everyone, because it is unfair. On the other side of the spectrum there are people who think only some are chosen and hence evangelism is not needed for they have been chosen already and God will work in them.
The truth about God and His plan should be approached rationally in this case. I will not dwell on the specifics of election here (see [Romans 8](bear://x-callback-url/open-note?id=C2A87CFC-4CC6-4C32-918F-EF4D8102A154-10247-0000FA09B8CBED34) for more information on this) but if it is clear that some will not even hear the Gospel or receive the attention from the evangelist to be persuaded, then we can at least say that at this point in time some have not been chosen to become children of God. 

*12 As you enter the house, greet it. 13 And if the house is worthy, let your peace come upon it, but if it is not worthy, let your peace return to you. 14 And if anyone will not receive you or listen to your words, shake off the dust from your feet ::when you leave that house or town::.*

How do we find out who is worthy? Apparently the answer has already been given in verse 14. If anyone will receive us or listen to our words, that means he is not worthy to receive the Gospel or God's peace. 
God's peace is given through the Gospel for it is only through knowing that our sins have been forgiven, that we can have hope in our justification and purification (see 1 John 1:9). 
But what do we say then when someone says he has perfect peace, because he does not believe in heaven or hell, someone whose conscience is not bothering him. Perhaps this perhaps can lie to himself and he will actually believe it for a while, just like we had before we came to Christ, but the truth will always catch up. Just like I had an encounter with the Holy Spirit by hearing a local evangelist speaking of repentance, so others will someday hear about the repentance. It is for this reason, I believe, that some do not *want* to hear the Gospel for they have already heard it vaguely and they do not want to be confronted by it (again). 
I actually know a person who is afraid to enter church because she knows she has to repent when she is there. So for this reason she only goes to church once a year—on Christmas Day—and then repents for a long time. If that makes her feel relieved, why would she not do that every day, so she would not feel the burden of her conscience all year long? 

*15 Truly, I say to you, it will be more bearable on the day of judgment for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah than for that town.*

The punishment inflicted on Sodom and Gomorrah was more than just the physical suffering of burning and suffocation as mentioned above. For those who survived, and I think there were none, and for those who had relatives there or relations, this would also mean the end of the two "cities". 
Now Sodom and Gomorrah are sometimes referred to as cities, because of their small size relative to our current day cities (big cities in China harbor more than ten million people), but actually these were countries of themselves with their own subculture. Genesis 14 refers to the leaders of those cities as "kings". 
It is probably not the citizens themselves who have learned of this punishment, for they had mere minutes before they died, but rather the people surrounding them. I suppose the neighboring countries knew of the sodomy just like certain areas in America are known for their crime. 
In the movie #tags/movies *Gran Torino* by Clint Eastwood #tags/famouspeople there was a scene where two friends walked into the wrong neighborhood and immediately an attempt to rob them was done. In certain areas among the *Hmong* people it was even almost certain for girls to be raped when they were at the wrong place at the wrong time. 
The surrounding countries would now know that immoral behavior would be punished, even though they would probably not know about the existence of the God of Abraham. 
In this particular case in Genesis this was an exception and the kings of Sodom, Gomorrah and Salem must have known about Abraham and his God for Abraham had just saved the people of Sodom, Gomorrah and three other countries. Abraham had used 318 trained servants, perhaps equivalent to soldiers, and defeated and chased four armies over a distance of about half of current day Israel. No group of people (with the same kind of training and availability of technology) would have been able to do that except with the help of God. 
Abraham must have become famous *because of God* along his travels for he gained riches twice from the Pharaoh of Egypt and Abimelech, the king of Gerar, although it is not certain whether he could keep the riches given to him by Pharaoh. It was God Who performed the miracles by plaguing Pharaoh and sending a dream to Abimelech. Now his reputation would only increase as God also defeated four armies of four countries and saved the people of five countries through him. 

***Persecution Will Come***
*16 “Behold, I am sending you out as sheep in the midst of wolves,*

#biblestudy/memorization  
Sheep are defenseless among wolves. In this case it seems like the sheep are outnumbers as well, that is an added disadvantage. A wolf can hide among sheep for he can lie and cheat, but a sheep c.q. a good Christian cannot do those things so he will be easily found out. 
As a matter of fact, the purpose of the Christian is *not* to hide, but it is to shine a light and to show that Christians and their God are different. What happens immediately is that all the wolves in this world will turn their eyes upon this sheep. Some might be surprised at their heroism and admire it, and might even be compelled to want to change into a sheep, which of course is not possible. Others might think the sheep is crazy and would not want to eat crazy sheep, being afraid they would themselves get sick and be contaminated. Still others immediately want to kill it and devour it. 
The sheep know they have no power, so verses 17ee are not possibilities but foretellings. It is almost 100 percent certain that a sheep among wolves will be eaten, that is how sure it is. 

#todo/nogaftemaken is this the case with every Christian then? We see that not every Christian is persecuted, right? That is true. We do not see it. But every Christian will suffer from being devoured by this world, by its culture, populism, popularity, materialism or some philosophy or #todo/opzoeken/engels verkeerde leer false doctrine, be it outside Christianity such as evolution or even within, such as Arminianism. 

*so be wise as serpents and innocent as doves.*

Jesus is calling on us to use our intelligence and wisdom, without crossing the line. A good example of this is when Paul used his knowledge and background of the Pharisees against the Sadducees in order to divide them and get the attention to be focused on their dispute instead of on him, although Paul did want the attention to be focused on Christ and (the possibility) of His resurrection. Other examples can be found in the Old Testament where Daniel decided to pray in a room that had windows (Daniel 6:10). It does not say whether he knew he was being spied upon, but it certainly would have been "wiser" in men's eyes to keep the windows shut. Perhaps Daniel's wisdom—or *shrewdness* as translated by the *NIV*—led him to do just this in order to be an example to the other Jews not to bow down to the king or any other idol. Even if it meant being killed, he would show that there is more honor in death than in kneeling to a foreign "god". God eventually would honor him. 

*17 Beware of men, for they will deliver you over to courts and flog you in their synagogues, 18 and you will be dragged before governors and kings for my sake, to bear witness before them and the Gentiles.*

This message was implied when Jesus answered Ananias when he doubted Jesus' command to seek and save the persecutor, Paul, from his blindness (see Acts 9:15). 
The same command and conclusion is given to all of us. Though the stories of the other disciples and the executions have not been written as explicitly as Paul's has, we know with fair certainty from history that Jesus' disciples died terrible deaths. See for more information on this topic Sean McDowell's #tags/famouspeople 
book #tags/books #todo/opzoeken *What happened to Jesus' disciples?*  which is also partly covered in the updated edition of *Evidence that Demands a Verdict*. #biblestudy/apologetics 
John MacArthur himself, in 2020, had to face court for "violating" rules on the COVID-19 policy #tags/historic events/corona#by not maintaining rules on social distance and wearing masks.

*19 When they deliver you over, do not be anxious how you are to speak or what you are to say, for what you are to say will be given to you in that hour. 20 For it is not you who speak, but the Spirit of your Father speaking through you.*

This verse is well-known and should not be misinterpreted as being applicable in any situation. It does not apply for situations where a person has not prepared himself for an (oral) exam or presentation, but it is meant for situations where one is before a court or government. Of course God is able to grant anyone and at any time His grace of receiving the words through His Spirit, but that is not what is described here.
On the other hand, when we are hard-pressed or afflicted (see 2 Corinthians 4:8) God is there with us in both strength in body, heart and mind and that is also in our words. 

*21 Brother will deliver brother over to death, and the father his child, and children will rise against parents and have them put to death,*

This is what happens in (Middle-)Eastern families when one leaves their family religion and becomes Christian. 
Examples of children who told on their parents in China, and still in North-Korea. Parents who are afraid to teach their children about Jesus, because they will talk about it in school. How do we deal with that when we want to disciple our children? 
It is easy to say following God comes first and discipling our children second. As for the former, this would mean that one should not give up his faith, despite persecution in the form of losing one's job, being sent to a concentration camp or even losing one's life. As for the latter this would mean telling them about God from the very start, or if parents come to Christ later on when their children are already older, tell them at that age. All of these consequences are possible of course and happen when someone else *finds out* the true identity and religion of the Christian and decides to report on them. 
In North-Korea we see that the Christians do not openly speak of their religion, but only do so secretly with those whom they trust. Is that the right way for a Christian to act and live? Paul knew he had enemies in certain places and still he spoke boldly on the streets knowing that some day his enemies would come and attack him. When this happened he tried to flee of course, if he knew about, which was not always the case, such as in Acts 21-22. Therefore, I think that Christians should not act secretly and keep their faith to themselves, but they should tell about others as boldly as they can, even with death—with glorification through it—written on their eyes. 
Effectively, this would easily distinguish the already small amount of Christians present in countries such as Yemen, the Maldives and North-Korea. Perhaps they would be locked away or killed. In the former case I think that still a great deal of evangelism can be done in prison as Paul has done (see Acts 9 #todo/opzoeken  the Philippian jailer) and many other who have been in prison can testify of, such as #tags/famouspeople/christian David Wood who came to Christ in prison and Kent Hovind, who has brought many people to Christ in the ten years of prison for not paying his taxes. 
All of this goes for evangelism to people outside of as well as within one's family. It does not matter whether the one who reports on you is your neighbor or your own child. If he does not hear the Gospel, he is lost. 
I understand that it id difficult for North Koreans to tell their children about God for several reasons. I suppose this is not a real reason, but perhaps they do not want their children to suffer the same fate. As a counterargument I should ask then whether it is better to suffer the fate of a child of God or of a child of this world. Of course it is the former. Why would one withhold one's child access to the greatest God and Father Who is the only One Who can provide hope in this wretched country and world? 
It is all driven by fear. Not even a fear that one cannot spread the Gospel anymore when one is jailed, but a fear of getting caught. 
Jesus, however, warns the world here in verse 15 that those who reject Christians who spread the Good News will suffer a fate worse than that of Sodom and Gomorra, which was being suffocated with sulfur gases while being burned alive. 
Also, one must know that even if all of the Christians are being dispersed or killed from a city, such as what happened in Korea when Robert Jermain Thomas #tags/famouspeople/christian/missionaries was killed, and which also happened during the Boxer's revolution #tags/historic events# when most or all of the Chinese missionaries who decided to stay in China were brutally murdered, the seed of the Gospel will grow even harder. China and India are two countries with the fastest growing church, perhaps North-Korea is relatively on a very high position as well, and South-Korea has the largest church in the world (despite its cultural and moral move toward secular Westernization).
In any place and time in history where people have tried to banish Christianity, it only rose up to become greater than ever.  

*22 and you will be hated by all for my name's sake. But the one who endures to the end will be saved. 23 When they persecute you in one town, ::flee:: to the next, for truly, I say to you, you will not have gone through all the towns of Israel before the Son of Man comes.*

We are allowed to flee but God does expect from us that we endure and persevere. #todo/nogaftemaken  
Jesus will not come back that soon. We still have time to reach many people. 
 
*24 “A disciple is not above his teacher, nor a servant above his master. 25 It is enough for the disciple to be like his teacher, and the servant like his master. If they have called the master of the house Beelzebul, how much more will they malign those of his household.*

In Matthew 12:24 Jesus is called a servant of Beelzebul by the Pharisees. Either this chapter was not written in chronological order or the Pharisees have accused Jesus of this more than once. 
It is interesting to see how Jesus uses deductive logic (or perhaps some other kind of logic, I do not know the exact name) to analyze the situation. 
As Jesus was talking about persecution here, He used the relation between a master and slave as an example of how His disciples would be persecuted just like Him. On the one hand Jesus says that servants should be equal or less than their master, meaning that servants would not reach a level higher than their master, nor receive a training that is harsher than that of their master, or in other words, never *exceed* their master. On the other hand, though, He says in verse 25 that the servants will be treated worse than their master, which is sort of exceeding their master's treatment for one could say then: "I have been punished worse than my master has" while we know this is hardly possible. Even Peter, who was to be crucified near the end of his life, thought it too high an honor for him to die in the same way as Jesus did and therefore asked to be crucified upside down (Footnote: This is according to multiple source, but in any case by the latest (2018?) version of the book #tags/books *Evidence that Demands a Verdict* which contains an extra chapter on the fate of the disciples and proof thereof by Sean McDowell #tags/famouspeople/christian.). 
In a sense one could say that some Christians have *seemingly* been treated worse than Jesus Christ, by being eaten or burned alive, but mentally—and perhaps even physically—it is agreed that no one has ever suffered more pain and agony than Jesus. Eventually the amount of pain is not borne in the flesh, but in the mind or soul, and Jesus had felt the full wrath of God for the punishment of all of mankind (Footnote: or of those that will ultimately be saved, but that is a theological dispute that will not be discussed here). In other words, no one suffered more than Jesus did. 
So if this is what is meant here, that disciples of Jesus will only *seemingly* be treated worse and only physically, then Jesus is saying that His disciples will never suffer more than their master. How do we interpret verse 25 then where it says that the household will be maligned even more? Jesus perhaps meant that disciples should not be treated better than their master. This would seem to contradict what I wrote above, for the disciples suffered less than their master. 
In any case, I should be honest in saying that I do not exactly know the explanation to this and the following might seem like spiritual ninjutsu on the words that Jesus used. 
If Jesus was *physically* treated worse than His disciples, Jesus meant that concerning persecution His disciples should be like their master, but not more than that. His disciples then were maligned more than the master in the sense of ... #biblestudy/questions #todo/nogaftemaken. 
If Jesus was *physically* treated less bad than His disciples, He meant that the disciples should not be treated better than the master and therefore be maligned more than their master. 
In both cases, however, Jesus suffered more in agony—because of God's Personal wrath on Him—and He was also relatively maligned more because of His innocence. Any malign against us would be partly righteous, be it however little, because each of us has done something wrong. But any malign against Jesus, be it however small, would be completely false and the slander upon Him would be infinitely big, just like the whiteness of perfectly white paint will never return after a drop of black ink has been put in it regardless of the amount of white paint that is added to it. 

***Have No Fear***
*26 “So have no fear of them, for nothing is covered that will not be revealed, or hidden that will not be known. 27 What I tell you in the dark, say in the light, and what you hear whispered, proclaim on the housetops. 28 And do not fear those who kill the body but cannot kill the soul. Rather fear him who can destroy both soul and body in hell.*

In our present time there are so many secrets that many so-called *conspiracy theorists* know about, which are hidden in plain sight, but the media and authorities, even judges, are not allowed to speak about, such as the *attack on the Twin Towers on 9/11*, pedophilia in the highest circles (see for example the case on Jeffrey Epstein who has supposedly committed suicide, but was apparently murdered and Marc Dutroux's case) and more recently the reason behind the COVID-19 policies even though there is no proof of the efficacy of masks, lockdowns and social distancing, why some businesses need to close such as restaurants, while the main sources of spread are in offices and schools, why policies on churches are stricter and why the vaccine is rushed in without proper testing. Lastly, and certainly not least, is the US Presidential election in 2020 #tags/historic events/corona# where there are so many questions unanswered. How could it be that the Democratic candidate, Joe Biden, lost to the far more popular Obama in all the Democratic states except in the swing states? How could it be that in every swing state president Trump had the lead and still had, until the vote count was stopped in a few states after which Trump had a loss in those states where the count was stopped but not in other states?  
The strange thing is that many of those conspiracy theorists are Christians. Charlie Kirk #tags/famouspeople/christian asked some people who are deeply into the research on this subject such as Mike Cernovich, producer of the documentary *Hoaxed* #tags/movies , a Senator and a professor at Liberty University who all happened to be Christians or in any case asked for prayer. 
Perhaps it is because Jesus tells us to speak about hidden secrets plainly and to *proclaim* that which is whispered. Real Christians are not afraid of the truth to be brought forward, they make it their life's work. *Why should a Christian care about losing his career or income or his popularity*? Should a Christian's career not be to proclaim the truth, in whatever fashion? Why should a Christian be afraid of losing his income? Jesus not coincidentally answers this question in the next three verses. And why should a Christian be afraid to lose all of friends and family because of these strange "conspiracies"? Jesus answers that in verse 34 by saying that He did not come to bring peace, but to bring judgment and a sword to divide those who are for Him and against Him. #church/material

*29 Are not two sparrows sold for a penny? And not one of them will fall to the ground apart from your Father. 30 But even the hairs of your head are all numbered. 31 Fear not, therefore; you are of more value than many sparrows.*

There is a saying "your days are numbered" indicating that one should watch out for one day he will die. But in this case it shows how much God loves and cares for you and knows about you. A sparrow is worth only half a penny and no one would go through any trouble of knowing this bird, but a human being is worth so much that God would count all of his hairs and even give each hair a number, just like He has named each of the trillions of stars we have in the universe (see Psalm 147:4). God will not easily let something as valuable as that perish.

*32 So everyone who acknowledges me before men, I also will acknowledge before my Father who is in heaven, 33 but whoever denies me before men, I also will deny before my Father who is in heaven.*

In the context of verse 16 where Christians need to witness to all kinds of enemies and governments, Jesus is giving us comfort here by saying that He will acknowledge us *before the Father* if we acknowledge Him before men. Which would be harder, to acknowledge Someone Who is perfectly good and sinless before a person or authority that can at the most kill your present life on Earth, or to acknowledge someone who is wicked to the bone—that is us—before Someone Who is perfectly holy and powerful and can torture the soul in hell and even destroy it? The answer is clear. Jesus has a much harder job to do than we do. 

***Not Peace, but a Sword***
*34 “Do not think that I have come to bring peace to the earth. I have not come to bring peace, but a sword.*

Jesus knows that as a consequence of this is that there will be division, even within one's family. Human love is not strong enough to overcome the barrier that Jesus places for the truth. Some will accept the truth—and this too is by Jesus who *makes* the blind see—while others do not see it or do not accept it.  

*35 For I have come to set a man against his father, and a daughter against her mother, and a daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law. 36 And a person's enemies will be those of his own household.*

In every field of life Jesus has come to separate us, or in other words to *make us holy* or to *sanctify* us, from this world—and especially in the part which will hurt most people most, the family. If one could accept that, then one can accept all other things. Why should Jesus mention that Christians should not have relationships with non-Christians, or have immoral jobs or read immoral books? All these things things flow out of what is said in verse 35. If even one's own household becomes one's enemy, then how much more would one's neighbor, classmate or colleague be one? 
There are no relations more intimate than those described in this verse except the matrimonial one. However, even one's spouse might become one's enemy, and it very frequently occurs in Islamic countries in the Middle-East and in the Hindu culture in India where the foundation against persecution of Christians, *Open Doors*, regularly reports of unbelieving people betraying their spouse and sometimes even banishing their own children along with it. 
It still is interesting why Jesus did not add this matrimonial relation in verse 35. If he had mentioned that, he would not even have had to mention all the other relations. Perhaps the reason is that Jesus did not come to set a husband against his wife. It happens, because the unbelieving spouse wants to divorce, but it is not Jesus' intention. In the case of parents and adult children, on the other hand, if they are imposing their pagan religion on a Christian, the Christian should distance himself from them, until they are open to hearing the Gospel again. However, the Christian should not distance himself from the unbelieving spouse. Paul affirms this in 1 Corinthians 7:12,15 by saying:
> *12 To the rest I say (I, not the Lord) that if any brother has a wife who is an unbeliever, and she consents to live with him, he should not divorce her.*  
> *15 But if the unbelieving partner separates, let it be so.*  
Note also that Jesus did say that Christians should distance themselves from their children. I will add to this that this concerns adolescent or younger children. Children who are not adults yet fall under the care of their parents and in that sense are made holy (1 Corinthians 7:14). The parents have the responsibility to bring them to Christ. 
Another thing to note is that the relation between son-in-law and father-in-law is noted here, because the father-in-law belongs to a different family, while the daughter-in-law belongs to her spouse's family. Only the closest relations are mentioned in verse 35 and the family on the mother's side are secondary within Hebrew culture to those on the father's side. 
This is also why Ruth #tags/bible/ruth and Orpah initially chose to go along with their mother-in-law Naomi, because they had already left their own family when they married their husbands. 

*37 Whoever loves father or mother more than me is not worthy of me, and whoever loves son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me. 38 And whoever does not take his cross and follow me is not worthy of me.*

John 9:39 and 12:37 tell us that blindness is one barrier to know Christ. A few verses later in verse 42 he adds to that that the longing for the acceptance of and the love for their community is one barrier. This verse in Matthew 10:37 confirms this. We cannot love our community more than Jesus, not even our closest friends and family and not even one's parents, children or spouse. 
One's children and parents did not die for you, and even if they did, they did not suffer what Jesus had suffered for you. Had they known that, they would not have died for you, that is for certain, for no man could or would be willing to sacrifice so much of himself and suffer the wrath of God for another. Humans are ultimately selfish beings. 
Jesus is very clear of what is asking here. He is not making any statement except for saying that one is not *worthy of Jesus* if He does not follows Him. That is all. He is not saying (in this verse that) one is a bad and sinful person. He is only saying that He had something to give and only those who are worth it He will give it to. This is a completely reasonable thing to ask. If one has something that others do not have he can decide for himself whether he wants to give it, to whom he wants to give it and on what conditions. 
#church/material **Example.** Laat de kinderen een cadeau zien en maak het heel duur. Belachelijk! Maar mijn goed recht toch? Zo is het ook met Jezus' gift. Hij mag vragen aan ons wat Hij wil, en Hij wil heel ons leven. Sommigen zeggen, mijn leven is toch niets waard, ik heb alles verkeerd gedaan in mijn leven, ik heb geen familie, geen werk, geen opleiding, ik heb niet eens een huis of enig ander bezit. Als ik mijn hele leven moet geven, dan doe ik dat. 
Ergens tussenin: heb je veel speelgoed, of veel boeken? 
Maar sommige mensen vinden hun leven heel veel waard. Ze hebben er heel veel in geïnvesteerd. Ze hebben heel veel geld op hun bankrekening, ze hebben ook altijd goede dingen gedaan, ze hebben heel veel vrienden en familie—en nu zegt Jezus ook dat ze hun leven op moeten geven. 
"Maar dat is toch niet eerlijk?" denk je dan, "Hij moet veel meer opgeven dan die ander". Allereerst, Jezus vraagt je om de *bereidheid* alles op te geven. Hij laat je jouw geld of speelgoed houden, maar Hij zegt wel: "*Het is nu van Mij. Als ik wil dat jij je speelgoed allemaal weggeeft aan iemand, dan moet jij dat doen.*" ben jij daar dan toe bereid? 
En inderdaad, Jezus vraagt aan deze persoon niet alleen zijn bereidheid om zijn eigen materiële dingen op te geven zoals speelgoed en geld, maar zelfs afscheid te nemen van zijn ouders en van zijn vrienden. 
~Toon het vers hierboven.~ 

*39 Whoever finds his life will lose it, and whoever loses his life for my sake will find it.*

That is not too much to ask of us, for whoever loses his life for *His'* sake will find it, He will receive a new life. This does not mean that only those who actually *lose* their life through persecution will get a new eternal life in heaven. It also does not mean that only when one dies he will get a new life. It means that even from this moment on we can lose our old life and give up everything we have and even right now in our old bodies we can receive the new life that He has promised us. 

***Rewards***
*40 “Whoever receives you receives me, and whoever receives me receives him who sent me.*

What would be the difference between receiving Jesus or the Father? In fact there would not, for Jesus has said that those who see Him have seen the Father. It would not be different at all. Now, however, we are given this right as well, even though our character and life are far from Jesus', we are not like Him in any sense. 

*41 The one who receives a prophet because he is a prophet will receive a prophet's reward, and the one who receives a righteous person because he is a righteous person will receive a righteous person's reward.*

If we accept a person for the right reasons, so not because he is rich, handsome or intelligent or for any other (selfish) reason, we will receive the same award as that person. This is an amazing reward if you think about it. So we can receive the reward of a prophet who has given up his life in order to follow God and who was willing to be stoned for reprimanding the people, simply by receiving him. Receiving here of course means that one needs to stay by his side, not like the disciples who ran off during Jesus' apprehension and trial. And yes, that could mean that we will be stoned as well, just like the Indian martyr Nokseng's family (see [notes on Isaiah 57:1](bear://x-callback-url/open-note?id=8F188465-8AB4-4A2D-8B09-01452BCB5373-479-0000248532332062)), but we will undeservingly receive huge rewards for such a small deed. God is gracious in deed indeed. And he is gracious to all men and to those who have not received the gift of prophecy. Even to those who are not righteous—not because of any gift, for righteousness is not related to gifts—He will reward for receiving the righteous. Take for example the presidential pardon of Dinesh D'Souza #tags/famouspeople/christian by President Trump #tags/historic events# #todo/nogaftemaken  I think he has been rewarded for that. 

*42 And whoever gives one of these little ones even a cup of cold water because he is a disciple, truly, I say to you, he will by no means lose his reward.”*

The thought of those non-Christian broadcasters such as Lange Frans, Robbert Jensen, Sven Hullemans and perhaps Thierry Baudet as well, who are not Christians but who are outspoken *for* Christians and receiving prophecies, if you will, either through those Christians or in some other way, and who are not afraid of losing their career—and some already have. These persons will definitely receive their reward.

#biblestudy/devotionals/matthew

#tags/bible/matthew #tags/politics/abortion