# Luke 16 (LSB)
> **Luke 16:1**   Now He was also saying to the disciples, “There was a rich man who had a steward, and this*steward* was 1reported to him as asquandering his possessions. **2** “And he called for him and said to him, ‘What is this I hear about you? Give an accounting of your stewardship, for you can no longer be steward.’ **3** “And the steward said to himself, ‘What shall I do, since my 1master is taking the stewardship away from me? I am not strong enough to dig; I am ashamed to beg. **4** ‘I know what I shall do, so that when I am removed from the stewardship people will 1take me into their homes.’ **5** “And he summoned each one of his 1master’s debtors, and he *began* saying to the first, ‘How much do you owe my master?’ **6** “And he said, ‘One hundred 1baths of oil.’ And he said to him, ‘Take your bill, and sit down quickly and write fifty.’ **7** “Then he said to another, ‘And how much do you owe?’ And he said, ‘One hundred 1kors of wheat.’ He said to him, ‘Take your bill, and write eighty.’ **8** “And his 1master praised the unrighteous steward because he had acted shrewdly, for the sons of athis age are more shrewd in relation to their own 2kind than the bsons of light.   

Perhaps Jesus is praising the people of this world, for they are more shrewd with their own people than we Christians are to ours. When we look at leadership and management courses we see that the world is much better than Christians are. There are of course a few Christian leaders, such as Bill Hybels and John Maxwell (and in the Netherlands Ben Tiggelaar), who have given great courses on how to lead people, but all of them learned from unbelievers. Bill Hybels mentioned the [three of five Cs](evernote:///view/8328181/s75/35bd12e5-ef68-4cb4-b219-cc5a6b071a00/3a31de55-4c32-47bb-99b9-1cdd22b0b4ac) that one should look for in a mentee, but I am sure he did not make that one up himself. Even leaders such as Stephen Covey was of the Latter Day Saints, who wrote the book #tags/books *The Seven Habits of a Leader* #todo/opzoeken . We see even more of those instructors rising on TED and Christians watching and following these people and even inviting them to speak at Christian conferences, such as Simon Sinek #tags/famouspeople who was invited to speak at the Compassion Conference in the Netherlands a few years ago. 
We see this even performed on a new level when Saul Alinsky #tags/famouspeople stirred up the Left #tags/politics in the past and how the Left now uses the same tactics to control their people. The Right has been—and still is—criticized for not having any control over their people, and the same goes for churches. 

**9** “And I say to you, amake friends for yourselves from the 1bwealth of unrighteousness, so that when it fails, cthey will 2take you into the eternal dwellings.

What this could mean is that there is unrighteousness in this world. We should not be unrighteous, but as it is present already, we might as well make use of it. For example, the mortgage structure in the Netherlands is unrighteous, for those with less income have to pay more rent while those with more income, and who can afford more, pay less rent due because they pay more taxes. (Footnote: On the other hand it is righteous, because people with more income pay more taxes, and those who pay more taxes should get more benefits.) I do not think God is asking us not to make use of this tax benefit or of the ANBI #todo/opzoeken/engels 401c3? tax clause, exemption for churches. 

Another example is that it is not wrong to make friends with those who are unrighteous as long as one does do anything that unrighteous. My father had a restaurant where some of his frequent customers were criminals. One day a friend visited my father, but during this visit his laptop and PDA were stolen from his car, which was parked in front of the restaurant. 
My father did not ask these criminals which of these stole it, but merely requested the PDA to be returned and they could keep the laptop. The very next day the PDA was returned through the mailbox. 


#biblestudy/devotionals/luke

 