# James 3 (ESV) 
***Taming the Tongue***
*1 Not many of you should become teachers, my brothers, for you know that we who teach will be judged with greater strictness. 2 For we all stumble in many ways. And if anyone does not stumble in what he says, he is a perfect man, able also to bridle his whole body. 3 If we put bits into the mouths of horses so that they obey us, we guide their whole bodies as well. 4 Look at the ships also: though they are so large and are driven by strong winds, they are guided by a very small rudder wherever the will of the pilot directs. 5 So also the tongue is a small member, yet it boasts of great things.*

This rudder cannot do anything by itself. Rather yet, if it were without a pilot and not locked, the rudder and the boat would flow along with the current. In the same way our tongue does not have a will of its own, it is controlled by a mind or a will. The question is whose will this is, ours or that of the Holy Spirit. 
Of course the Holy Spirit will not let us say anything wrong. So if anyone says anything improper or gossips or even says something only realizing what he said afterward, these words were already in his will. 
The matter in which we are able to control our tongue is only by letting our will to be totally controlled by the Holy Spirit. We either step down as pilot of our ship or we take every instruction from God Himself.

*How great a forest is set ablaze by such a small fire! 6 And the tongue is a fire, a world of unrighteousness. The tongue is set among our members, staining the whole body, setting on fire the entire course of life, and set on fire by hell.* 

Every tree has the potential to become a great bonfire. One tree alone could warm perhaps hundreds of houses for hours—especially when efficiency is applied. But when the wood is wet, that is when the tree is still alive, this is hardly possible. If our body is a forest made up of many trees this means that every member of our body has great potential for sinning, but the living water flowing through each member prevents the member from setting fire. 
#todo/familytime 
Another thing that is important to note is that the tongue is *set* among our members. This means that the tongue is not separate from our members. We know of course that every part of our body is interconnected. A severe pain in any of our members could cause us to faint and become restless. So if the tongue sins, which stains the whole body, it lets the whole body sin. When we have sinned with our tongue against someone, the other person will not blame your tongue. He will blame your whole person, your character, your moral values and perhaps even doubt your Christianity. 
Even more than the spread to other members of our body, sin lets the rest of our life become sinful. We all know this because we all bear the consequences of our sin. 
~~If four bodies are for rest~~ 

Lastly, note that the tongue is set on fire by hell. #todo/nogaftemaken 


*7 For every kind of beast and bird, of ::reptile:: and sea creature, can be tamed and has been tamed by mankind, 8 but no human being can tame the tongue. It is a restless evil, full of deadly poison.*

As mentioned before, it is actually our will, or our being in itself that is sinful and cannot be tamed, but our being expresses itself through our tongue, sometimes even unbeknownst. More than that, even with good intentions, when something is said in a not so tactical way, or without diplomacy in other situations, these words may still acts as a fire and incite others. Even when one does not have any sin he knows of himself (in the case he was not rash in saying these things or has never learned any tactical skills in speech in specific cultures) the other may be hurt by his words and in return attack with his words, and so kindle a greater fire. 
No human being can be tamed and no human being can tame another person. Socialists have tried to all through history through fear and suppression by taking people's wealth and safety, and the elite of the New World Order, the Illuminati through the Freemasons #tags/conspiracy/nwo are adding to that total control of everyone's data, so that there is extra leverage to threaten people with their secrets or influence them unconsciously. But this is only of the last decades (I think) since digital information has become an asset. Before the socialists every empire has in some way tried to control its people, which was never possible on a big scale. The reason why each empire lost—in my view—is because the empire became too big. A king like Alexander the Great needed generals and they have #todo/opzoeken/engels what's under a general too. As long as these #todo/opzoeken/engels onderofficieren obey their superiors and as long as these superiors do not change the commands of the supreme leader the people can be controlled in some way. 
But the situation of Alexander the Great was different, for he ruled for merely a short period. Enthusiasm through the many victories could have kept up the spirits of the soldiers and officers to be incorruptible. In the situation of the Babylonians or the Persians for example they have an army of about a million soldiers #todo/opzoeken which comes to about 100.000 soldiers divided over ten countries. When they tried to conquer more than that, not only did they lose many soldiers on the way to victory, decreasing the number of soldiers, but they also needed to station a few soldiers in every city they conquered, or they would eventually rebel against the new empire, as the neo-Babylonians had done under Nebuchadnezzar against the Assyrians. #tags/historic events#
In China, where the conquest of land stayed approximately the same and was limited to the area of current day China in the west, Myanmar and Nepal in the south and Vietnam and Korea in the east, many dynasties were overthrown not because of a shortage of soldiers, but because of the people's dissatisfaction where taxes were raised—which has been a cause for dissatisfaction in every age and culture—mainly due to the emperors' lavish lifestyles and lack of attention #todo/opzoeken/engels aandacht, zorg for the people's wellbeing. 
Both in the Chinese and in the Roman dynasties we see that when an emperor was good to the people, the people would oblige to the emperor. Yet this is not the total control the New World Order longs for, because they do not want to give anything. Instead, they pretend to give them what they need, by creating a need that the people do not need. For this purpose they have created a fake pandemic, which created the "need" of a solution, the vaccine, which does not even kill the virus but only makes it worse and kills even more people and allows them to control the people even more through 5G and graphene oxide. 
Truly, they cannot tame all the people, but they can control some to some extent and those they cannot control, they can identify and execute. 
The Word is still true, however, the tongue cannot be tamed. No matter how the elite are to control people, even restricting freedom of speech, so that no one tells other what they really think of the situation, they cannot control people's tongue with which they curse and say negative things about each other. Not even in a utopian society such as that of the movie *Demolition Man* #tags/movies with Sylvester Stallone, Wesley Snipes and Sandra Bullock #tags/famouspeople/actors we see that this is possible.

*9 With it we bless our Lord and Father, and with it we curse people who are made in the likeness of God. 10 From the same mouth come blessing and cursing. My brothers, these things ought not to be so. 11 Does a spring pour forth from the same opening both fresh and salt water? 12 Can a fig tree, my brothers, bear olives, or a grapevine produce figs? Neither can a salt pond yield fresh water.*

When we do the above, that is we curse people and we bless God, can we say we are Christians? But what if we do it by accident? The same spring can never give fresh and salt water, not even "by accident." This verse claims then that everyone who does so, does not have a pure source. Does this mean then that he does not have the Holy Spirit or rather that he has a mixture of the Holy Spirit and our own spirit? One thing is for sure, these words did not come from the Holy Spirit.
This would be part of the third commandment, which is not to take the Lord's Name in vain (see Exodus 20). It must be said though that Dennis Prager #tags/famouspeople, not a Christian, but a Jew, who wrote a commentary on Exodus, explained that this commandment is about the Lord's Name with a capital *N*, that is God's reputation and not necessarily using His name in the wrong context. 
This commandment perhaps would be the easiest if it were only limited to words, for I do not remember having once uttered God's name in vain, nor have I heard many Christians do the same. So I would agree with Dennis Prager in this sense, because it is much harder not to *carry* God's Name in vain than merely not to use it in vain. 

***Wisdom from Above***
*13 Who is wise and understanding among you? By his good conduct let him show his works in ::the meekness of wisdom::.*

If anyone is wise and understand he can show it. This is not boasting of arrogance if he shows his works in a meek way. The phrase "meekness of wisdom" already shows that one typical characteristic of wisdom is meekness. Lawrence Krauss #tags/famouspeople/critics#, though being an atheist (although he does not describe himself as anything he *is not* but rather as something he *is* in his interview with Ray Comfort #tags/famouspeople/christian#, which is a fair point, as does Michael Shermer #tags/famouspeople/critics in with Ben Shapiro on the *Ben Shapiro Sunday Special*), also showed this wisdom when he debated Dinesh D'Souza #tags/famouspeople/christian, coincidentally together with Michael Shermer‚ and mentioned that science can show a scientist is wrong and that the good thing about science is that it corrects itself through #todo/opzoeken/engels voortschrijdend inzicht. It never claims that it is certain, like Christianity does. This, of course, was well received by the audience with a round of applause because it showed his pretentious meekness of his wisdom. I am saying pretentious in reality when something is posed in science as a scientific "fact", and as soon as it has been accepted as such by the scientific community, it is very hard and nearly impossible to refute this fact. The scientific community had a huge sense of pride and is not willing to admit its mistakes. 
Take the theory of evolution for example where many mistakes have been made. If we only take a few of the clearly mistaken "evidences" and questionable theories, lots of books would need to reprinted and this would cause a huge doubt towards this theory. Many of the evidences of the so-called human ancestors, neanderthals and the like, were created upon the finding of a mere piece of skull or bone. We did not know how these people looked at all. The theory of their big brows and foreheads has never been compared to the big eyebrows of the aboriginals who use their jaws and teeth as a tool to chip off wood for example, which cause strong muscle and a different bone forming in the forehead and brow. 
The end-result would be that people really would start seeing the theory of evolution as a *theory* and not as something that has been established, which in turn would discredit all of their work. It even goes so far that the top of the scientific academia even know that evolution is a farce, but none go so far as to say this publicly. So this means that even Lawrence Krauss, who is a distinguished professor, but not in the league of the top, probably is unaware of this reality and perceives every article he reads as being the truth, not to mention people like Michael Shermer who are not even scientists. 

*14 But if you have bitter jealousy and selfish ambition in your hearts, do not boast and be false to the truth. 15 This is not the wisdom that comes down from above, but is earthly, unspiritual, demonic. 16 For where jealousy and selfish ambition exist, there will be disorder and every vile practice.*

Verse 13 asks those to show their works, but to do this in good conduct and in meekness. It also calls out only those who are wise and understanding, as a preface in the first sentence. This wisdom and understanding could refer to two things. It could refer to the wisdom that is spoken of here, to wisely and meekly use one's tongue, and also to the wisdom of Solomon for example, but it could also refer to general intellect and knowledge, without a deeper understanding of the truth. I think James refers to the latter in this call-out, which would render a paraphrase as follows. 
> Those who are smart and of great intellect: show your skills, but only in good conduct, that is without boasting, and in a meek way, that is be open to cricism. #composed/bible/james  

However, verse 14 explicitly tells us not to boast of the knowledge we have if there is any bitter jealousy and selfish ambition in you. What other reasons would there be to show your knowledge except for good intention, that is to help others, to boast about your knowledge and to have a bitter jealousy towards someone and you want to show you are better than the other. 
The latter might seem related to the second reason, for out of jealousy one boasts. See for example Chris Pratt #tags/famouspeople/actors in the movie #tags/movies *Avengers: Infinity Wars* meeting Thor (Chris Hemsworth #tags/famouspeople/actors) for the first time and feeling jealous (though not in a bitter way) and therefore starts acting as if he is just as tough as he is. But it is jealousy that drives him, so it is the motivational drive that differentiates here. 
James tells us that boasting in this way is false to the truth, with which he means that this is not the way of the Gospel, which is the true way of living a Christian life. Of course he is not referring to whether something is true or not.  He even goes as far as to call this *evil*. Now surely one no will doubt that boasting of oneself if a sin, but that it is evil is a step further. But just like the tongue is only a small flame, perhaps even seemingly harmless sometimes, but the results are huge, in the same way boasting has disastrous effects—disorder and every vile practice. 
If we look at history's greatest killers we see that jealousy and selfish ambition were the motivators. Hitler is the most obvious example, for Europeans at least because they have learned about his history. Hitler was a student at the arts academy, or he wanted to be one but was not accepted. Here there was a rejection, but even before that there was one that was greater than that. He born out of a Jewish servant #todo/opzoeken who was perhaps raped, or the mistress of the master of the house, and he was not accepted by him as his son. This is quite similar to the book and movie #tags/movies *Character*, which won the Academy Award® in #todo/opzoeken ....  for Best Movie in a Foreign Language #todo/opzoeken  . The difference was that the protagonist in this movie was determined to stay good and work harder than everyone else in order to achieve his career, despite his heritage, being a sort of bastard child, whereas Hitler used his history to fuel his rage at his background #todo/opzoeken/engels afkomst, which were the Jews. 
#tags/historic events/wwii#
Do we need to speak of Mao, who had a similar grudge towards his poverty and status as a poor and uneducated farmer's son? Undoubtedly bitter jealousy fueled his rage towards the bourgeois and especially the royal family. 

Every vile practice is conceivable through jealousy and selfish ambition. Hollywood has shown what is possible, history has shown that it is possible.

*17 But the wisdom from above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, open to reason, full of mercy and good fruits, impartial and sincere. 18 And a harvest of righteousness is sown in peace by those who make peace.*

When wisdom is used to rebuke or advise someone (I do not know for what other reason wisdom could be used except for those reasons explained in 2 Timothy 3:17, but these all fall under the the same denominator #todo/opzoeken/engels) it is only considered wisdom by God when it suffices the definition posed verse 17. 
**It is pure.** This means that the advise is given with pure intentions, not to harm anyone, regardless of whether it eventually will harm anyone. 
**It is peaceable.** True wisdom wants to bring peace and should bring peace, although we have seen, even in the Bible, that it can cause some to anger even more. All of Jesus' words were wisdom, by definition but also by logic, but these angered the Pharisees, scribes and members of the Sanhedrin every time because these were not in line with their desires (cf. James 1:13f). Yet, if anyone is open to God's wisdom it will bring peace. 
It is open to reason. Even though there is not much to win in a debate with Jesus or His Words, because they are true any way one looks at it, still there is much to ask for reasoning and understanding. Nicodemus (see John 2 #todo/opzoeken) asked for explanations and 2 Timothy 3:17 says the Word is meant for teaching. 
Another interpretation of this rule/lemma #todo/opzoeken/engels is that wisdom is reasonable. William Lane Craig's #tags/famouspeople/christian website is even called  [ReasonableFaith.org](http://reasonablefaith.org/). 

#todo/nogaftemaken gentle en open to reason
**It is gentle.** This is not the same kind of gentleness (Gr: ἐπιεικής)—nor root word—used in Matthew 11:29, which is translated as meek (Gr: πρᾷός).

**It is open to reason.** Translated as ("easy to be intreated" *KJV*) and "willing to yield" (*NKJV*). 

**It is full of mercy and good fruits.** The result of good advice should of course be good on the long term, but more than that it should be full of mercy. What is defined as good by one, may not be beneficial to the other. An example of a definition of good as defined by the world used in economics is a solution where some people will be better off due to the implementation of this solution. However, other people would be worse off, which would not be merciful, which is then according to the Bible not a wise solution. 
**It is impartial.** True wisdom does not favor any party, especially not due to someone's outer appearance. 
**It is sincere.**  #todo/nogaftemaken I need to find out what the difference is between sincerity and purity. The *NKJV* translates this as "without hypocrisy".

**Example.** #todo/nogaftemaken voorbeeld over hoe mijn advies naar de Chinese kerk toe, de "oudsten" niets van deze wijsheid had. 
I am not going to boast about my wisdom but instead I will boast about my failure to show wisdom in a certain situation. 

#biblestudy/devotionals/james

