# 2 Thessalonians 2 (ESV) 
***The Man of Lawlessness***
*1 Now concerning the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ and our being gathered together to him, we ask you, brothers, 2 not to be ::quickly:: shaken in mind or alarmed, either by a spirit or a spoken word, or a letter seeming to be from us, to the effect that the day of the Lord has come. 3 Let no one deceive you in any way. ::For that day will not come, unless the rebellion comes first, and the man of lawlessness is revealed, the son of destruction, 4 who opposes and exalts himself against every so-called god or object of worship, so that he takes his seat in the temple of God, proclaiming himself to be God.::*

At the moment of writing, i.e. 2022, many things are happening in the world. The so-called coronavirus "pandemic" and its ensuing lockdowns (which do not prevent corona but rather accelerate the spread by keeping people at home, unhealthy, mentally stressed, without physical exercise and fresh air), PCR tests (which cannot test whether a person has corona or not) and "vaccines" (which technically seen are not vaccines at all and kill more people than they save—if any at all—and have many serious side-effects). Next to that there is a so-called invasion of Russia into Ukraine, climate change is coming to climax where every person and company has to monitor their carbon footprint. There is much more than this and even more to come. Still, this is not a sign of **the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ**. We are waiting for the **rebellion** and revelation of the **man of lawlessness**, which is **the son of destruction**. We have seen many rebellious persons, who are rich and power and influential in changing the world's course, such as Bill Gates (whose *Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation* has much to do with the vaccine and most likely with the creation of the virus as well), George Soros (who invests in all of this, amongst others in companies and organizations with Leftist views) and #todo/opzoeken/engels het meest "belangrijk" Klaus Schwab #tags/famouspeople the leader of the *World Economic Forum*. All of these are lawless, being either above the law or destroying the world with their policies, and starting rebellions through one or more of their causes, but none of these has exalted himself above other gods. Only dictators such as Kim Jong-Un exert this kind of behavior, but do not have any influence on the world. The president of China, Xi Jin Ping #tags/famouspeople , might be close to this description, although not much is known about him or his motives. We do not see him actively eradicating all religions—although the freedom of religion is under great pressure in China. At the same time, though, China has dropped in its position on the list of countries with persecution of Christian, which might be because other countries have increased more than China in their aggressiveness towards Christians, or because China just manages to hide it better. 
Also, we do not see Xi #todo/opzoeken/engels zichzelf neerzetten as a godlike figure, yet we know that he is as good as worshipped and obeyed instantaneously, albeit through fear rather than awe, being able to view and control every person's social media account, censor the media and even control the votes for the coming years, setting himself up as the next president in the upcoming elections.
Whether Xi will actually one day take his seat in the temple of God—which would need to be built first, since it has been destroyed by the Romans and its location is currently #todo/opzoeken/engels ingenomen by the Muslim *Dome of the Rock* #tags/religion/islam —no one knows, but currently he seems to be the one closest to this position. 
In any case, it is not the time yet for Jesus to come, but the current events are closer to the end-times than ever in history.

*5 Do you not remember that when I was still with you I told you these things? 6 And you know what is restraining him now so that he may be revealed in his time. 7 For the mystery of lawlessness is already at work. Only he who now restrains it will do so until he is out of the way.*

Both "he's" in this verse refer to God, for it is God Who restrains the lawless one and He will only do so until He gets out of the way of the lawless one. After that the events in v.8 will take place. 

*8 And then the lawless one will be revealed, whom the Lord Jesus will kill with the breath of his mouth and bring to nothing by the appearance of his coming.*

This is a very short summary of the events described in Revelation, for the **lawless one will be revealed** and he will steal and kill and destroy (cf. John 10:10) #todo/opzoeken the same as the Beast? He will be worshipped by all who are (perhaps unknowingly) already worshipping him. 
What is even shorter is the description of how easily **the Lord Jesus will kill** the lawless one only by **the breath of his mouth**, which is even an *overstatement* of the effort that Jesus needs to put into doing this. Simply by *willing* this, this already happens. The other symbolic description is that the lawless is not merely destroyed, but he is brought **to nothing** simply the **appearance of his coming**. 
Perhaps this is the way things will happen in the future. Jesus will come and everything will be swept away. We always imagine a war going on on Judgment Day between the angels and Satan's demons, but there will be none. His angels will come—not even to assist Jesus, for He only needs to will, and everything happens according to plan—but merely as messengers and servants. God can send the message to all the people of the world that He has come and has destroyed—or will destroy, depending on when He sends this message—the lawless one, the beast—if he is not the same as the lawless one, the Satan and his dominion, but it would be better if His servants spread this message, for a king does not announce these things about Himself. 

*9 The coming of the lawless one is by the activity of Satan with all power and false signs and wonders, 10 and with all wicked deception for those who are perishing, because they refused to love the truth and so be saved.*

The **coming of the lawless one** is meant in the first place for those are already perishing, that is those who **refused to love the truth**. We can already see a distinction between people on the Left #tags/politics/left and those who are now called Independents or even *Left of center*. Those are people who are more or less rational, seeking the truth through logic, although they still hold on to a wrong worldview where there is no God and ultimate authority over them and over moral values. In a sense they refuse the truth, that is the truth about God and about their sinfulness, but as for other things, they embrace the truth.
The extreme Leftists are those for which the lawless one has come and who will first embrace him. People who support the Black Lives Matter movement are one of those people who love violence and reject and *actively* refuse to see the truth.
The death of the Afro-American Michael Brown by a white police officer initiated the Black Lives Matter movement #tags/historic events/blm#. People started rioting even before they got their facts straight. They claimed that Michael Brown raised his hands and had his back turned to the police, and that the police shot him in the back while running away. The facts and witness testimonies show the opposite. Nevertheless black America—and instigated by it, most white Americans and the rest of the western world as well—supports the claim that white people are inherently racists again other peoples, especially towards the black. They simply will not look at the facts. Never mind the fact that George Brown was a criminal, and never mind the fact that they call the police when something is wrong, never mind the fact that in a few years time only 12 black men have been shot by white police officers, and all other black men where shot by black police officers.
Another riot started when George Floyd died by suffocation, who was already an [indicted criminal](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/George_Floyd) who had just been trying to [pay with a counterfeit bill](https://www.the-sun.com/entertainment/1417426/unarmed-black-people-killed-police-blm/), while he was on drugs and most likely due to the latter could not breathe well. The policeman who arrested him, [Derek Chauvin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Derek_Chauvin), was charged with multiple accounts of murder for supposedly putting his knee on his neck, while first of all video footage shows that his knee was on the shoulder blade, as policemen are supposed to do, and second of all there were testimonies (and video footage) that Floyd already could had breathing problems while he was in the car. 
Fortunately some [websites](https://trendingpolitics.com/the-data-prove-there-is-no-epidemic-of-unarmed-black-men-shot-by-police-knab/) show the truth yet this is a mere drop in the ocean of Leftist tears. 

*11 Therefore God sends them a strong delusion, so that they may believe what is false, 12 in order that all may be condemned who did not believe the truth but had pleasure in unrighteousness.*

The people who follow the narrative of BLM might be led by all these lies. Some might be sincere and truly believe what they hear, although they too are guilty for not taking up the responsibility to find out the truth (cf. Acts 17:10). The leaders of the BLM-movement, however, are already believing in their own lies. People like Congresswoman Frederica Wilson and Stacey Abrams, who also happen to be black themselves, tell lies to the people. For these kind of people God **sends ... a strong delusion, so that they may believe what is false**. These kind of people also **had pleasure in unrighteousness**, just like the rioters, who do not even care about Michael Brown or George Floyd or racism in the US. They were merely trying to find an excuse to loot stores and put cars and shops on fire. 

***Stand Firm***
*13 But we ought always to give thanks to God for you, brothers beloved by the Lord, because God chose you as the firstfruits to be saved, through sanctification by the Spirit and belief in the truth.*

Some people do not realize how thankful they should be for others who have been saved. If one falls in love with a woman and she happens to be a Christian, they should be thankful that their beloved has been saved, for if she were not, he would have to find another partner (Footnote: Note that a true Christian would not even fall in love with an unbeliever, for what in this woman (in this case) could possibly attract him? The unbeliever rejects Jesus, does not believe in the Resurrection, literal Six-Day Creation and a Young Earth, an Almighty God and the Holy Trinity. The  unbeliever would not accept *all* of God's commands and His authority and sovereignty and the authority to the husband within the family. In short, the unbeliever would view the whole world differently as well as every decision made in the believer's life, from waking to sleeping, in every field of his life, from spiritual health to financial health. The only things that could be attractive about the unbeliever could be his looks, intelligence, power, status or riches—all of which things the child of God should not strive for.). But take for example the person who has unbelieving relatives or even children, how difficult it is for him to speak of God? How lonely he must be when surrounded by solely unbelievers.
So we give thanks to God for any person we know who is a believer, to whom we can speak with spiritual words, whom we can ask for a prayer and who bless us. I have met people in our church who were so relieved to finally be among brothers again, because they were not involved in a church. Some want be around Christians all the time and some of those I meet multiple times a week at fellowships for example. 
I have the same feeling myself when I am abroad on a trip, especially when I am in country where true Christianity is so rare, such as in Mexico, Italy and Cuba. It is there where I meet true Christians and where we connect spiritually, regardless of whether we speak the same language. 
(See also notes on 2 Thessalonians 2:3.)

*14 To this he called you through our gospel, so that you may obtain the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. 15 So then, brothers, stand firm and hold to the traditions that you were taught by us, either by our spoken word or by our letter.*

But the reason we have Christian brothers and sisters around is not so that we are not lonely or that we might be healed, blessed or prayed for—not even so that we can serve them—rather it is so that we can give glory to **our Lord Jesus Christ** but in our to *give* Him glory we first need to receive the glory *from* Him. 
This is why we need to **stand firm and hold to the traditions that** we **were taught**, by our mentors, elders and all other Christians, be it missionary and postmortem or from one-to-one sessions.

*16 Now may our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God our Father, who loved us and gave us eternal comfort and good hope through grace, 17 comfort your hearts and establish them in every good work and word.*

The **comfort** that God the gives is **eternal**. The **hope** He gives us is **good**. Our **hearts** are **establish**ed **in every good work and word**. What does this latter mean? In all of the works we must do as a Christian we will suffer hardships, sometimes even up to the point of persecution and death. Especially missionaries suffer from these consequences as we have seen in the life of e.g. Adoniram Judson #tags/famouspeople/christian who lost his wife, his child #todo/opzoeken was imprisoned and not rewarded for all the work he had done for the Burmese (now Myanmar) government. Not only his spiritual work of translating the Bible into Burmese and developing the phonetic #todo/opzoeken system for it, but also the creation of the first Burmese-English dictionary was a huge step forward for Burma to start trade with other nations and develop economically. In these hard times the Christian needs comfort and it needs to be settled on the unmoving Rock of Christ. This is what the Father does. In *every* good work we do and every good word we say, #todo/opzoeken  like some missionaries raised up the courage #todo/opzoeken/engels to speak for large hostile crowds (misschien voorbeeld van Stefanus?) , God will comfort and establish our hearts. 


#biblestudy/devotionals/2thessalonians 