# 1 Thessalonians 4 (ESV) 
**A Life Pleasing to God**
*1 Finally, then, brothers, we ask and urge you in the Lord Jesus, that as you received from us how you ought to walk and to please God, just as you are doing, that you do so more and more. 2 For you know what instructions we gave you through the Lord Jesus. 3 For this is the will of God, your sanctification: that you abstain from sexual immorality; 4 that each one of you know how to control his own body in holiness and honor, 5 not in the passion of lust like the Gentiles who do not know God; 6 that no one transgress and wrong his brother in this matter, because the Lord is an avenger in all these things, as we told you beforehand and solemnly warned you.*

The Thessalonians were clear on the **instructions** to **abstain from sexual immorality**. He explicitly mentions one thing, however—which raises at least one question in me—which is **that no one transgress and wrong his brother** (v.6). Usually, when it concerns sexual immorality—also translated as *fornication*)—I would think of any sexual sin—in the first place, outside of marriage #todo/nogaftemaken reference to John Piper's article on divorce and remarriage—such as premarital sex, the visiting of prostitutes or the viewing of pornography (which perhaps did not exist back then, but perhaps it took place in some other way). Of course, sex between two men would also fall under this definition of fornication, but that would not be my first thought, especially not within a church. 
It would be like one warns a church about 
* not to watch the wrong tv programs, 
* not to binge eat
* not to have premarital sex (which happens in churches)
* and then... not to have gay sex. 
This would be so strange to give as a warning. For who would do such a thing in church? 

Why then would they mention the wronging of one's *brother*? Homosexual sin would be one application, but another—perhaps more intuitive and logical—would be if one had an affair with a brother's wife or relative, say his sister or daughter. Any man who defiles a woman, not only wrongs her, but her male relative as well, except when she has none—in normal situations everyone has at least a father though. So here, instead of "brother" this could be substituted with "brother or sister". Even if the woman has no relatives at all, if she is Christian she has become part of the family of the heavenly Father and with the local congregation as well. Wronging her then would be equal to wronging the sister of the whole church. So any transgression—in the field of sexual immorality, but actually in all other fields—*in the church* would wrong the Christian brother and sister. 

*7 For God has not called us for impurity, but in holiness. 8 Therefore whoever disregards this, disregards not man but God, who gives his Holy Spirit to you.*

Just as explained above the disregard is not towards the victim only, but against the whole church and ultimately to **God**. *Disregard* here is in the most literal sense of the word, for the **Holy Spirit** is the one who lets the Christian *regard* (that is, see) **holiness** and what **impurity** needs to be removed. The Christian cannot but see and he is not able to close his eyes, for the vision the Holy Spirit gives is not dependent on the eyes but burns an image in the mind and weighs heavy in the heart. One who **disregards** the words of the Holy Spirit needs to turn himself a blind eye towards the hurt caused to his fellowman and to God. No Christian would do this accidentally. This action would require a great amount of willpower for one to willingly ignore the Spirit's call to sanctification. 

*9 Now concerning brotherly love you have no need for anyone to write to you, for you yourselves have been taught by God to love one another, 10 for that indeed is what you are doing to all the brothers throughout Macedonia. But we urge you, brothers, to do this more and more, 11 and to aspire to live quietly, and to mind your own affairs, and to work with your hands, as we instructed you, 12 so that you may walk properly before outsiders and be dependent on no one.*

As implied in the notes on 1 Thessalonians 3:11-13, Paul clearly lets the Thessalonians know that they should not be satisfied with the level of their Christian walk and that they should *never* be. The Christian should always **love one another more and more**. Paul urged the Thessalonians three times in this way:  
1. He urges them to *increase and abound in love for one another* (1 Thessalonians 3:12-13), and to establish blameless hearts, perhaps meaning sinless thoughts and having pure desires and perhaps also referring to the coming of Christ, which he expounds on in 4:13).
2. He urges them *to walk and to please God [...] more and more* (v.1) with a reference to abstain from sexual immorality.
3. He urges them to *love one another more and more*, asking them **to live quietly** (v.11-12).

This is for most—at least for me—a peculiar trichotomy of God's commandments. In Acts, for example, the letter of the council to the newly converted Gentiles was a clear trichotomy of the Law, taking place in the form three commandments: do not sin against God, against one's neighbor or against one's own body, which is God's (see notes on Acts 15:29). 

One form of trichotomy that has been applied here could be as follows: inside (one's thoughts), outside (one's body), further outside (one's neighbors). Another form could be to live a holy life (2), a peaceful life (3), and—for the third dimension I would have to be creative—to have a life full of love (1). Yet another form would be that (1) refers to the future, (2) refers to the holy walk with God and (3) refers to the peaceful life with our fellowmen. This latter form would not seem to be very consistent, where even a *time* dimension is involved, but perhaps God intends to point us to these three things:  (1) our focus, (2) our spiritual walk and (3) our worldly walk. 
In real life as well, we only do two things each day. In the morning we set our hearts on God through prayer, after which we enter the world and fight two battles at the same time, the spiritual and the worldly one. 
#church/material/sermon
#todo/nogaftemaken 

Now there is this last verse that could easily be interpreted in a wrong way. Paul calls on the Thessalonians **to mind your own affairs, and to work with your hands ... so that you may walk properly before outsiders and be dependent on no one.** All three seem to have been incorporated by the traditional and orthodox churches which all have a not so positive reputation in the world and have become very isolated. Now the reputation Christians have in this world is not important, even if it repels them from coming to Christ—as long as we know our example is that of Christ and according to His Word. There is, however, a *reason* why this reputation is as such. 
With the first part, **to mind your own affairs**, Paul refers to a *gentle* and *quiet spirit* (1 Peter 3:4), working out *one's own* sanctification and *salvation* (Philippians 2:12) and not to look at one's neighbor's speck in his eye but first at the log in his own eye (Luke 6:42). It does *not* mean that Christians should not be involved in matters of this world or never let their voice be heard in certain matters. Both in the United States as well as in the Netherlands there are Christian politicians, leaders of pro-life movements and companies that only sell non-GMO and organic (food) products. As a matter of fact, it was exactly because Christians heard and saw the need of the people and *acted* upon it, such as William Booth #tags/famouspeople/christian/missionaries, who saw the poverty and the problem of alcoholism in slums of the East End of London, and preached the Gospel there, or George Mueller, who rescued many orphans who were forced into child labor and founded many orphanages. Minding one's affairs simply means to mind one's affairs *first* and get right with God, and *then* minding the affairs of others. 
Sadly, we see this behavior of seeing things as other people's business in many of the traditional churches. I do not see any evangelical activitities within the Reformed and Orthodox churches or in the Amish and Mennonite communities. They do not have a bad reputation per se. Outsiders see them as people as minding their own business, but not as helping out the *bigger* community. 
With the next part, **to work with your hands**, Paul does not imply that one should do physical labor only as a job. It has become quite noticeable to me that a greater percentage of Reformed Christians in the Netherlands are laborers, having lower education jobs and less academic proficiency. Within the general Dutch population about 15-25% finishes their academic education, meaning they graduate with their Master's Degree, but this percentage is much smaller within the Reformed community. Perhaps there is some prevalent view that there are more important things in life than one's degree, which is true, but does not hold that one should *not* choose to follow a higher education.
Lastly, Christians should **be dependent on no one**. This dependence should not be on the government either. There are a number of Christian schools in the Netherlands, but these are all publically funded. Christians are insured by insurance companies which are governed by the government as well. In my opinion Christians should be completely independent of the government in all fields of life. They should pay taxes, for making use of public facilities, but in healthcare, their pensions or any such thing we should never be dependent on anyone other than God. 
If anyone gets sick, the Christian community should pay for the medical expenses of this person. It is not possible that the Christian community does not have enough money. The Christian community is the richest in the United States. A research and survey between Republicans and Democrats showed that Republicans are far richer than Democrats, but also that Republicans give much more percentage-wise than Democrats. The reason why some Christian communities do not have enough money is because their community is too small, and it is too small because it does not join or work together with other communities. Just the fact that it is called *another* community already makes clear that there is a separation between communities in such a way that they are not willing to help out each other. 
These communities do not necessarily have problems with each other—although there certainly are those that have—but they are too strict in keeping themselves separated. The Door #todo/opzoeken link zoeken, for example is a church that operates independently from other churches. It does not work together or have joint conferences or any cooperations with other churches. They have the good intention of keeping their own theology pure by not letting their members join become influenced by other churches, however, this does lead to isolation. 
I will not say that in practise it is impossible to communities to work together, for it *is* and *must be* possible. In the *Torchlighter* #tags/movies series we see missionaries from all kinds of backgrounds and denominations—except for the Catholic ones, which God-fearing Christians who have studied the Bible carefully, believe is a sect at best and demonic at worst (Footnote: This does not mean there are no true Christians within the Catholic Church. However, whenever these realize that the Catholic Church adds some things to the Bible and diminishes others, they should flee from it.). There are both Arminian, Calvinist and Brethren missionaries (I am not sure if any are of the Seventh Day Adventists, whose theology is also un-Christian at some points). Open Doors, which supports the persecuted church, also supports Christians around the world regardless of their denomination (Footnote: It must be noted that Open Doors *does* support Catholics though.).  
Christian communities working together *is* possible. We know that persecution and the Tribulation of the end-time will bring Christian communities together, because we will then strive together as one—the *only* one—for the faith of the Gospel (Philippians 1:27). So why wait until then when we can do it now? 

***The Coming of the Lord***
*13 But we do not want you to be uninformed, brothers, about those who are asleep, that you may not grieve as others do who have no hope.*

The way in which Christians grieve should be different from unbelievers. Christians put their hope in Jesus Who **died and rose again** and **will bring with him those who have fallen asleep**. We do not have to worry about those who died before they met Christ in person when He was on Earth or after Christ had already died and risen and had gone to heaven. We also do not need to worry about those who die before His second coming—and chances are big that we are part of this group as well. Rather yet, it is the group of all people who have believed in Him and accepted Him as their Lord and Savior who will go with Jesus *first*. Those people have already proven throughout their life that they followed Jesus all the way, and even more for those who have been persecuted unto death. That is why it is written in the Beatitudes in Matthew 5 that the persecuted are blessed and will have a great reward in heaven. One of these rewards is that they will meet Jesus first. 
What about Moses and Elijah then, for example? They have already met Jesus and probably are with Him right now. Will they rise up again from the Earth at Jesus' Second Coming, while they actually already were with Him? Will their soul, which is now in heaven, go back into the body that is buried here on Earth, to rise and be with Jesus, after which the living people do so? Regardless of one's position on the order of end-time events and whether the Rapture #tags/theology/endtimes/rapture is before or after the Great Tribulation #tags/theology/endtimes/tribulation, it is clear that those whose bodies have decayed or been putrefied or are completey gone, burned or eaten, will rise with new bodies. It is not clear in the Bible whether these are physical or spiritual bodies and if the former, whether these are immortal ones, but deducting from the fact that either these people will go up to heaven to be with Jesus during the period of the Tribulation, which is by most accounts seven years (some say it is 3.5 years, that is they claim that Jesus will come at the second half of the seven-year Tribulation because that will be most unbearable), or that these people will rise up to heaven to meet Jesus halfway and return with Him to Earth to reign in the 1000-year empire #todo/opzoeken/engels, in both cases it would not be physical bodies that would be taken upwards to heaven. Our current physical bodies would not survive in heaven near the glory of God and they would not survive "half-way" heaven, 10 kilometers in the atmosphere because of the cold and the lack of oxygen. Also, in the 1000-year empire people will grow up to be 100 years old, while still be as ... as young men ( #todo/opzoeken/reference). #todo/nogaftemaken So these are indications that the bodies that Christians will obtain at Jesus's return are not physical or normal like the ones we have now. 6

*14 For since we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so, through Jesus, God will bring with him those who have fallen asleep. 15 For this we declare to you by a word from the Lord, that we who are alive, who are left until the coming of the Lord, will not precede those who have fallen asleep. 16 For the Lord himself will descend from heaven with a cry of command, with the voice of an archangel, and with the sound of the trumpet of God. And the dead in Christ will rise first. 17 Then we who are alive, who are left, will be caught up together with them in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air, and so we will always be with the Lord. 18 Therefore encourage one another with these words.*

Why would we need to **encourage one another** **with these words**? Does this not only apply for those who fear they will miss out on the **coming of the Lord**? How important is it to know in what fashion God will come and whether the dead will come before or after the living? 
It is because of the #todo/opzoeken/engels tegenovergestelde van individualisme (group) behavior. In the West we do not understand this because of individualistic lifestyle. We only care about whether we will go to heaven ourself. We rationalize this by saying that there will be no bad memories in heaven, and thus no memories of our loved ones who did not enter heaven. But here on Earth, those who love their loved ones are truly worried about them. Sometimes so much that they even choose other religions because of the pratical rituals involving the veneration of the dead, in this case their parents and forefathers. 
I myself am Chinese, but I grew up in the Netherlands, thinking like one as well. I have had relatively good parents who loved me, but I am nowhere close to loving them as children do in Asia and Africa and in the rest of the world—except for the West—who have had parents who have loved and given them much less than I have been loved and have received in my life.
This is something I need to repent of. Jacob's children showed their love for their father, even though he had four wives and treated the mother of at least six brothers (that is Leah) different and worse than he treated Rachel, let alone the slave women of both mothers. Perhaps they had kept this in their hearts, but they still loved him so much that they were willing to give their own lives for him (at least Judah was (Footnote: Whether Judah was more or less than willing to give his own life is the question. He was willing to offer the lives of his sons (plural). To some, giving up one's son is worth even more than one's own life. If this were the case, Judah would have been very 偉大 #todo/opzoeken/engels for he did not only offer his child, but his *son*, and not one, but *two* sons. In the other case, it would be cowardly of Judah not to offer his own life.)).
Lord, please forgive me for my stubbornness and my hardness of heart. Change my heart and let it thaw of the ice that has accumulated over the years. I have never given you the opportunity to completely melt it. Each time you started, I stopped you and let ice grow over it again, in order to prevent the wall of my heart from getting weak. 
I do not know how it feels to love someone completely and unconditionally, that is why my love is incomplete and conditional. Change me, oh Lord, and renew my heart, for this old heart of mine cannot be repaired anymore and it belongs to the world, along with everything it craves. But let not my soul be disintegrated along with my body and old life. Let it dwell in Your house forever.
Amen.

#biblestudy/devotionals/1thessalonians
