# James 4 (ESV)
***Warning Against Worldliness***
*1 What causes quarrels and what causes fights among you? Is it not this, that your passions are at war within you? 2 You desire and do not have, so you murder. You covet and cannot obtain, so you fight and quarrel.*

Note that the last verse of the previous chapter shows the opposite of what is written here. It shows that righteousness is harvested by those who make peace. Here it says that the harvest is quarrels and fights, because what they sowed was desires. Those desires eventually lead to death whether we obtain what we want or not (James 1:15), but when we do not obtain them, they lead to the deaths of others (cf. v2. murder) as well. 

*You do not have, because you do not ask. 3 You ask and do not receive, because you ask wrongly, to spend it on your passions.*

This seems to be part of my own testimony. In my life I have always asked for the right job, but I never honestly looked at myself and asked for what God wanted me to do, where He wanted me to be. Secretly I wanted to get rich easily, while doing what I want, but instead I did not get rich and I never liked what I did at my job. I did not ask sincerely and I did not receive. When I asked, it was not sincerely and I got the opposite of what I wanted. 
When I asked God sincerely, and even had others to pray for me as well, I quit my job at VipaHelda, which was my longest kept job ever, five-and-a-half years, and only seemed to have random short-term jobs of 5 and 3 months, and the last one being about 5 weeks only, respectively, being paid less than market value for what I did at the company (at *Everlight*), less than what I had studied for (*FF Chemicals*) and not being paid at all (at *The Foundation*), but the added value to me was much greater than the ten years before. 
At *The Foundation*, as a teacher, I found out that enjoyed teaching and discipling children, along with Biblical studies. At *Everlight* I got to do what I enjoyed most, working in a small company and putting changes in effect that change or improve processes (although I did not get to do much of that because of a lack of support form management). At *FF Chemicals* I got to do physical work, which I enjoyed, while thinking about process optimization. Aside from that I did not have to speak a lot at work, so it was a good time to talk to God during work and let my mind come to rest as well. 
Perhaps in my next job God will give me all of the three things above—this is what I feel. God can work in ways that He lets me experience things that I like or dislike, in order to know what I miss or to appreciate what I have in my current job. I was never satisfied with a salary of 4000-5000 euros while working relaxedly at the office, with only a little bit of commuting, but now that I have worked at *FF Chemicals* I have experienced hard working for 9 hours a day, become not only all wet because of the sweat, but dirty as well, while commuting by car for 1.5 hours each day—and this was with little to no traffic jams. 
So in my next job I ask God to give me *first of all* what He wants me to have, whether having a job or no job, and to put me in the right place with the right people, and if He wills, to let me teach, be among children, improve processes and work physically as well, with not too much commuting time.

*4 You adulterous people! Do you not know that friendship with the world is enmity with God? Therefore whoever wishes to be a friend of the world makes himself an enemy of God.*

What was wrong with what I asked was that I asked for my passions. Now each have their own passions which could be right or wrong. Mine were wrong because I longed for worldly things, and that is enmity with God. 
God clearly protected me from enmity with Him by not giving me what I longed for. This could have led to death through my evil desires (James 1:14), to strife and jealousy out of selfish ambition (James 3:16), but God was merciful to me and granted me peace in my heart (Philippians 4:7) and He let His Spirit speak to me to long for the good things. He gave me endurance and steadfastness during the test (James 1:12). 

*5 Or do you suppose it is to no purpose that the Scripture says, ::“He yearns jealously over the spirit that he has made to dwell in us”?*::

Other translations but the NIV and the ESV, such as the (N)KJV, ASV and HSV, provide another interpretation of this verse, where the spirit is the subject and is interpreted as the Holy Spirit. In the former translations the spirit is the object and refers not to the Holy Spirit but rather the human spirit. This renders the interpretation of the NIV and the ESV as
> God is very jealous of the spirit that dwells in us. He wants this spirit to belong to Him only and not to lust for anything of this world. #composed/bible/james  
The other translations would interpret this verse as 
> The Holy Spirit that God put in us is very jealous of all the things the world has to offer, the things which we do not have.   
This would not make any sense of course. That is why *MacSBNnkjv* has used a combination of the two interpretations and rendered it as 
> The spirit that God put in us is very jealous of all the things of this world that it does not have.   

Depending on whether we can determine whether the form of the word "spirit" is an object or subject (perhaps we cannot, because they could both be the same), we can determine whether the first or the last interpretation is correct. 

*6 But he gives more grace. Therefore it says, “God opposes the proud but gives grace to the humble.”*

This verse definitely is related with the previous verse, but what is meant with "more" grace? More than what? More than our jealousy and lust for worldly things? Perhaps it is so and what God means then is that even though our spirit lusts for worldly things, or—depending on the translation (see notes on v.5)—even though God is very jealous of our spirit that does not long to Him but to this world, He is still full of grace and His grace abounds, even more so than the sin we have committed by longing for this world. 
It is for this reason that the quote in this verse says that God gives grace. It does not matter that this grace is to the humble, for even the "humble" people mentioned here, also fall under the category of those who are enemies of God. His grace would have been enough for even the proud, but the proud do not even want to accept God's grace. 

*7 Submit yourselves therefore to God. Resist the devil, and he will flee from you. 8 Draw near to God, and he will draw near to you. Cleanse your hands, you sinners, and purify your hearts, you double-minded.* #biblestudy/memorization/nathan/todo  

There is so much simplicity and yet wisdom and truth in this verse. Resist the devil and he will flee from you. We see this in #todo/opzoeken/engels afkicken of addictions. All addicts—and in a sense we all are, be it of substances or of activities such entertainment or social media—feel the urge in their minds to run back to that thing that provided them with temporal satisfaction and a fake feeling of safety. But all they need to do to get rid of this addiction is to flee from it. 
Why do so many addicts still fall back into old patterns, you might ask, even after they had been clean for a long period. It is because they physically resisted the object of addiction, but mentally they allowed themselves to long for it. Take for example the scene in *Breaking Bad* #tags/movies where Aaron Paul #todo/opzoeken #tags/famouspeople/actors meets a former drug addict who had been clean for over a year. After he starts using meth she initially refuses, but after she gives in to "suffer with him" her longing then appears not to have arisen just that moment, but it was there all the time. The same kind of behavior we see in the movie *Traffic* #tags/movies where Michael Douglas' #tags/famouspeople/actors character's daughter was temporarily off of drugs, but then easily reverted to even a worse form of addiction, because she never *wanted* to be off of drugs. 
I was only speaking of verse 7, but verse 8 merely confirms what I have written. All we need to do is to draw near to God—which implies we move farther away from the devil—but this is only possible if we are not double-minded.

*9 Be wretched and mourn and weep. Let your laughter be turned to mourning and your joy to gloom. 10 Humble yourselves before the Lord, and he will exalt you.* 

How do we do we become singleminded then as in verse 8? We need to come to a state where we really repent of our sins. We need to realize the mistakes we have made and the pain we have caused others. Only then we will become singleminded. Our other mind, which longs for the addictions, will disappear then and only then when we have humbled ourselves before the Lord. Then we will be exalted by being set free from the power of sin. 
Many unbelievers have gotten through the first stage, where they humbled themselves and realized their mistakes and the pain. This is what set them free from their addiction. But they did not take the last stap, which is to humble themselves *before the Lord*. So they are not set free from sin and might fall into another addiction. And so we often see either that or another form of religiosity and idolatry, now not in the form of a substance, but a religion of doing good and hard work. 

*11 Do not speak evil against one another, brothers. The one who speaks against a brother or judges his brother, speaks evil against the law and judges the law. But if you judge the law, you are not a doer of the law but a judge. 12 There is only one lawgiver and judge, he who is able to save and to destroy. But who are you to judge your neighbor?*

This is a very difficult passage. Why would one not be allowed to speak against a fellow Christian (I assume that "brother" here means a "Christian brother")? Are we not able to judge by the Holy Spirit whether a brother or sister is doing wrong and then bring him before the judge or the elders? Why does verse 11 say that when we do such things we are judging the law itself? 
Moreover, why does it say we are judging the law? The judge does not even judge a law, but only rules according to these laws. Yes, the Supreme Court can judge a law and perhaps overrule it, but it is the lawmakers who create (and perhaps annul #todo/opzoeken en #todo/opzoeken/engels ) the law. 
The answer is that the first part of verse 11 is not speaking of judging a brother, but *speaking evil* against a brother, which is like gossiping or slandering someone, which is a crime (see also the book #tags/books *Trump's Unfinished Business* by Steve Cioccolanti #tags/famouspeople/christian. When one slanders another person he is putting up a false testimony about someone. Of course he is breaking the Ninth Commandment but more explicitly, he is making the innocent object of his slander into a guilty person. This means that he implies some kind of sovereignty on the law by making someone guilty even if the Law says he is not. (That is another sin he commits, by putting himself above the lawmaker.) This in turn implies that he judges the law, for where the law says that this person is not guilty, the slanderer says he is and he tells everyone else. So he judges that this law is wrong but he is right and he sets himself up as an interpreter of the law, which is a judge. 
Judges are interpreters of the law and interpret the situations of plaintiffs and defendants to be under or outside of the law and consequently rule. But they do have the right to decide this themselves, even if their decision and interpretation are wrong. 
What is the different then with free speech? Free speech means that one can express himself in the way he wants, but in this specific case it is not an expression but a condemnation. This false testimony will be present in the heads of everyone who hears this and the slandered person's reputation will have been damaged. That in itself is undeserved condemnation for the man.

***Boasting About Tomorrow***
*13 Come now, you who say, “Today or tomorrow we will go into such and such a town and spend a year there and trade and make a profit”— 14 yet you do not know what tomorrow will bring. What is your life? For you are a mist that appears for a little time and then vanishes. 15 Instead you ought to say, “If the Lord wills, we will live and do this or that.” 16 As it is, you boast in your arrogance. All such boasting is evil. 17 So whoever knows the right thing to do and fails to do it, for him it is sin.*

Many of us make this mistake to make plans for businesses or trip. Are all these Christians—for unbelievers do not even know God and therefore will not say "if the Lord wills"—arrogant then? No, verse 17 specifically mentions that it is sin for those who know what the right thing to do is. 
This pericope is targeting those Christian who know they need to ask God for permission, yet pursue their own goals in achievement of riches and other comforts of this world, neglecting God's will in the process. 
First of all this is boasting, second of all boasting is evil, which which brings us to the question of why this is boasting and why boasting is evil? Boasting is the act of claiming one is better than the other. In this specific case it is boasting because one claims to know better than God what is good for himself. 
**Voorbeeld.** YouShu who claimed to know better, by marrying an unbeliever. #todo/nogaftemaken 

Second, why is boasting evil? We often brag about our accomplishments not knowing the seriousness of sin there is in it. One might not have the intention to insult God and merely wants to show the other, without belittling him, that he is better than he is at a certain thing.
We forget, however, that we disregard God's glory in this and the honor that is due Him. He is the One Who gave us all the talents—He even lets us breathe without nothing is possible! 
Is this sin then so serious that it can be called *evil*—that is *of the devil*—or is it only evil in the context of where a person is willingly sinning? It is evil because it is the start of ignoring humility, which is knowing where comes from and where he received his gifts from; ignoring the honor for God (ignoring honor for humans where honor is due is one thing, but ignoring it when it is due to God is a whole other thing); ignoring that *everything* should be done in the light of the glory of God. Every #todo/opzoeken/engels onderneming will be tested by the scrutiny of critics and anti-theists who will view a failed trip, be it for business or missionary purposes, as a failing God. This will happen all the more when people boastfully speak of their future accomplishments and create great expectations or better said, great traps for themselves which the anti-theists can use.

#biblestudy/devotionals/james