# James 2 (ESV) 
***The Sin of Partiality***
*1 My brothers, show no partiality as you hold the faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory. 2 For if a man wearing a gold ring and fine clothing comes into your assembly, and a poor man in shabby clothing also comes in, 3 and if you pay attention to the one who wears the fine clothing and say, “You sit here in a good place,” while you say to the poor man, “You stand over there,” or, “Sit down at my feet,” 4 have you not then made distinctions among yourselves and become judges with evil thoughts? 5 Listen, my beloved brothers, has not God chosen those who are poor in the world to be rich in faith and heirs of the kingdom, which he has promised to those who love him?*

This is a reference to those with eternal life, cf. James 1:12. 

*6 But you have dishonored the poor man. Are not the rich the ones who oppress you, and the ones who drag you into court? 7 Are they not the ones who blaspheme the honorable name by which you were called?*

It is the rich who oppress us, sue us and blaspheme God. In other words, not only do they steal our money and ruin our reputation, but they also #todo/opzoeken/engels sacrilege? heiligschennis our faith. Why would one ever follow or respect this group of people? I can imagine only one reason and that is that one wants to be like them. The oppressed look up to their oppressor when they do not want to be oppressed anymore and the only two ways out are to become the oppressor or to believe in the Almighty God Who will help us out of this oppression in due time, even though that might take 400 years in the case of Israel in Egypt. *Most*—I would say—do not know of this second option or are not willing to believe in it (I am purposefully saying "willing to believe". I know believing in something is not a choice, but if the will to believe is not even there, then one is further from the faith than when at least he wants to believe but needs help with his faith (cf. the Roman centurion #todo/opzoeken ).). 
A good example of this is shown in the movie *Scarface* #tags/movies where the protagonist played by Al Pacino #tags/famouspeople/actors is one of those oppressed people, being an immigrant from Puerto Rico, who eventually becomes the oppressor himself and the most ruth one of all. 
Verse 6 tells us here that is illogical to look up to those people. Why would anyone want to become like the one who made his life miserable? Why would anyone want to do these things to others? (By definition they are then not fulfilling the royal law in the next verse because they are doing to others what they did not wish was done unto them.) Does he not remember how he was treated himself? No, rather yet, treat the poor with honor and you shall be honored by God—perhaps not in this world, but definitely in the next. 

*8 If you really fulfill the royal law according to the Scripture, “You shall love your neighbor as yourself,” you are doing well. 9 But if you show partiality, you are committing sin and are convicted by the law as transgressors. 10 For whoever keeps the whole law but fails in one point has become guilty of all of it. 11 For he who said, “Do not commit adultery,” also said, “Do not murder.” If you do not commit adultery but do murder, you have become a transgressor of the law.*

James states the Law of Moses in a very clear way. One is either a transgressor of *the Law* or not. He is not saying that one is a transgressor of a specific law or commandment—it does not matter which law it is, a transgressor is a transgressor, that is all that matters. He ends his example with two serious crimes of adultery and murder, which renders one a transgressor if either commandment has been broken, but he had begun his example of showing partiality which is part of the royal law to love your neighbor as yourself. The mere trespass of showing partiality, which is a very common sin, probably done by everyone, has already rendered everyone into a transgressor of the law of Moses, which is the law of death and sin (Romans 8:2). 

*12 So speak and so act as those who are to be judged under the law of liberty. 13 For judgment is without mercy to one who has shown no mercy. Mercy triumphs over judgment.*

#todo in Evernote aanvullen Family time over vorken en wie er lid is van het huis, zie 2 Timotheüs 2:16ff. 

***Faith Without Works Is Dead***
*14 What good is it, my brothers, if someone says he has faith but does not have works? Can that faith save him? 15 If a brother or sister is poorly clothed and lacking in daily food, 16 and one of you says to them, “Go in peace, be warmed and filled,” without giving them the things needed for the body, what good is that? 17 So also faith by itself, if it does not have works, is dead.*
*::18 But someone will say, “You have faith and I have works.” Show me your faith apart from your works, and I will show you my faith by my works.::*

I had some trouble interpreting this verse, because of several issues. First, where should the quotes exactly be placed? Is it after "I have works" or after "by my works"? Assuming the former, a second issue arises, which is that James calls on the other to show his faith. But other did not claim he had faith, but only works. 
I had imagined this conversation to be between, for example, a Pharisee, who has works but not faith, and a Christian. The Pharisee would judge the Christian to be of less works than he is, which is true in a sense. 
Perhaps what James means here is that regardless of one's affiliation, when one has works he has faith as well, for these cannot be separated. If a person such as an atheist, wants to show his works without faith to show that secular #todo/opzoeken/engels tegenovergestelde van egoïsme is possible, then James argues that that actually is what Christians call and define "faith" by. On the other hand, how can James as a Christian show his faith? He cannot show it through presenting his heart or mind, for one cannot see the hidden things, but he can show it through his works. 

*19 You believe that God is one; you do well. Even the demons believe—and shudder! 20 Do you want to be shown, you foolish person, that faith apart from works is useless? 21 Was not Abraham our father justified by works when he offered up his son Isaac on the altar? 22 You see that faith was active along with his works, and faith was completed by his works; 23 and the Scripture was fulfilled that says, “Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him as righteousness”—and he was called a friend of God. 24 You see that a person is justified by works and not by faith alone. 25 And in the same way was not also Rahab the prostitute justified by works when she received the messengers and sent them out by another way? 26 For as the body apart from the spirit is dead, so also faith apart from works is dead.*

The phrase "justified by works" must be interpreted in a very careful manner here. Of course our justification is by faith, and this verse is not contradicting Romans 5:1, but it is complementing it. This faith, however, shows itself, though not necessarily in a chronological way such as in Abraham's case. It is not that we first have faith and then need to prove our faith and only then have been justified? No, the justification takes place at the moment of having faith, but as a result of this faith, one will act out by his works. 
When one acts differently from what he says he believes in, then he is lying about his faith. In the same way one cannot say he believes that the Lord Yahweh is God and deny Him out of fear for man, whether his life is threatened or not, for believing in God as the greatest means that one knows that God is to be feared more than man but also that He is able to save us if He wills it. 

#biblestudy/devotionals/james