# James 1 (ESV) 
***Greeting***
*1 James, a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ,*
*To the twelve tribes in the ::Dispersion:::*
*Greetings.*

***Testing of Your Faith***
*2 ::Count it all joy::, my brothers, when you meet trials of various kinds, 3 for you know that the testing of your faith produces steadfastness. 4 And let steadfastness ::have its full effect::, that you may be perfect and complete, lacking in nothing.*

Romans 5:4 already mentions the reason for our suffering which ultimately are meant to give us hope. No one has had hope as great as one who suffers, for when one's life is good, not much hope is needed to continue living, but when everything in life has gone, then one can only thrive on hope, for that is freely poured into our hearts by the Holy Spirit (Romans 5:11). 
This verse zooms a little on this perseverance (*NIV*) or endurance (*ESV*) mentioned there although the same Greek word ὑπομονήν (hypomone) is translated as *steadfastness* (*ESV*) here, although the *KJV* and *NIV* use the same translations *patience* and *perseverance*.
Why would the *ESV* have chosen to use (1) a different translation and (2) and old term where even the *KJV* uses a "normal" word such as patience? 
To me, these three words used in the *ESV* and *KJV* have different meanings. *Endurance* is probably used in Romans 5 because one has to endure the suffering, which is different than overcoming it. Rather yet, I would say that endurance is more like being "patient" as the *KJV* describes this. One can passively sit still and endure the suffering and be called patient. *Steadfastness*, however, to me means that one should be striving towards the end, not giving up hope. So the terms enduring and patience would be more fitting to Job, who endured everything, and although he did not curse God, it seemed like he gave up hope. 
In steadfastness I would expect positivity, or better said *the joy of the Lord*, in a person's life, in all circumstances such during the suffering of Peter, Paul, Silas and in the Old Testament Joseph, but David I would not include given his melancholic Psalms, even though he never gave up his hope in the Lord.  

*5 If any of you lacks wisdom, let him ask God, who gives generously to all without reproach, and it will be given him. 6 But let him ask in faith, with no doubting, for the one who doubts is like a wave of the sea that is driven and tossed by the wind. 7 For that person must not suppose that he will receive anything from the Lord; 8 he is a double-minded man, unstable in all his ways.* #biblestudy/memorization

Wisdom would be to ask God for an answer in any and every situation. Even if one lacks wisdom, though, there should be enough wisdom in him to ask God. In almost every movie where a person becomes hopeless and desperate, they seek God—though not necessarily by this name, but they seek a higher power without knowing that it is God Who provides. This much wisdom at least is given to all. 
Even those who refuse to seek God do so out of stubbornness and pride, not because they did not know about this option. But when they do seek God, it might be they fall in the category of people described by verse 6 already. They would because of their pride have become someone who doubts the will of God to help them. Verse 7 says that this person must suppose that he will receive anything from the Lord, but in truth they are supposing that God will not give them anything anyway *a priori* and they are testing the Lord by figuratively saying "show me I am wrong." This, perhaps, is the double-mindedness that verse 8 speaks of. God would not provide for such a person. He would not honor God more when God has helped Him and he would approach the unforgiveable sin #todo/opzoeken in the situation where God actually has helped Him by neglecting this help and claiming that any blessing he received, is due to coincidence—forgetting the hopeless pit he was in. 
**Example.** I know of a person who claimed she was a Christian up until her mother passed away. When I asked her about everything she knew or saw from God, she claimed that all of the miracles she had ever seen were merely coincidences. I fear for the state of her soul, not only because she clearly claims not to be a Christian anymore—which is worse enough to go to hell—but also ignores and does away all the good that God had done and is doing for her right now. God is merciful and patient, but these sins are counted, especially in her case because she knows about them #todo/nogaftemaken #todo/opzoeken waar staat dat mensen die de Bijbel kennen het zwaarder zal worden aangerekend? 

*9 Let the lowly brother boast in his exaltation, 10 and the rich in his humiliation, because like a flower of the grass he will pass away. 11 For the sun rises with its scorching heat and withers the grass; its flower falls, and its beauty perishes. So also will the rich man fade away in the midst of his pursuits.*

Some fade faster than others and some of the rich and even wicked stay alive longer that the good people. I believe it was the son of David Rockefeller and he himself as well were well alive and over 90 years old. #todo/opzoeken Their curse and punishment will come, but not in ways known to us. We do not need to know and it is good that we do not know or we would #todo/opzoeken/engels onszelf erin berusten or perhaps comfort ourselves with another person's punishment. All we need to know, is that righteousness has taken place, is taking place currently in the heavenly realms or that it will take place on and after the Day of Judgment. 

*12 Blessed is the man who remains steadfast under trial, for when he has stood the test he will receive the crown of life, which God has promised to those who love him. 13 Let no one say when he is tempted, “I am being tempted by God,” for God cannot be tempted with evil, and he himself tempts no one. 14 But each person is tempted when he is lured and enticed by his own desire. 15 Then desire when it has conceived gives birth to sin, and sin when it is fully grown brings forth death.* #biblestudy/memorization

#todo/nogaftemaken 

*16 Do not be deceived, my beloved brothers. 17 Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, coming down from the Father of lights, with whom there is no variation or shadow due to change.*

The deception lies in the fact that some think that some gifts are from this world because they think that this world has good things to offer as well. For sure, in this world there is nature, but that is created by God; there is technology in the form of automobiles, phones and the Internet and there is lots of entertainment through and on these things. Is entertainment from this world or from God? The basis of entertainment is from God, for God gave man creativity in order to create music and movies; He gave man intelligence in order to create technology and more than that, this technology only works because of the laws of physics, which God created and which God let found by man. Humans corrupted these gifts by using them for themselves and for the wrong purposes. 
The answer is in short that there is no good thing coming from the Earth. Anything that is good is from the Father.

*18 Of his own will he brought us forth by the word of truth, that we should be a kind of firstfruits of his creatures.*

#biblestudy/questions I am still wondering whether this should not be written as "Of His own will He *have* brought us forth." Other translations clearly translate this forthbringing as a type of birth, which is not translated differently here, but a "have" for the present continuous is lacking. Could this be a spelling error? 
We are born from the truth. Only human souls can distinguish the truth, that is why humans are of a higher order than animals. Humans seek for the truth, that is why we have philosophy. 
The truth of God is His law. This only applies to God. If I find red a beautiful color, there is no law that prohibits anything that is not red. But if God *finds* some things *good*, then *by definition* everything else *is not good*. This is why the moral law of God has automatically come into existence, even before the Law was given (cf. Romans 5:13), because God created the world and even the universe before the world was created in truth, which made lying immoral, and life, which made murdering immoral, and faithfulness, which made adultery and idolatry immoral.
Thus—for those in history who understood what I wrote above—some understood that God exclusively works with *laws*—for laws derive order—of which some have not been found (yet) by us. The Christian scientific men sought God's law in nature, which lead to the laws of mathematics and physics of which Isaac Newton #tags/famouspeople/christian is a great example. 

***Hearing and Doing the Word***
*19 Know this, my beloved brothers: let every person be quick to hear, slow to speak, slow to anger; 20 for the anger of man does not produce the righteousness of God.* #biblestudy/memorization/nathan 

*21 Therefore put away all filthiness and rampant wickedness and receive with meekness the implanted word, which is able to save your souls.*

From this verse it seems like the filthiness and rampant wickedness are related to the anger of man, because of the "therefore" that this verse starts with. I do not see a direct relation between these two types of behavior. Of course, when one receives the Word of God his anger will disappear as well, and this anger is caused by something, but not necessarily filthiness or even wickedness. Granted, every man is wicked, but the wickedness posed here is probably referring to a specific kind and larger degree of wickedness, in the sense of criminals and hypocrites. 
It would be best for each man, however, to go consider his own reason for his anger and see if there is wickedness in him. In most cases, I believe, there is, and if one should think otherwise about his own reason for anger, or if he does not have any anger issues, then let him ignore this relation between the two verses but consider these separately as sources of wisdom. 

*22 But be doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving yourselves. 23 For if anyone is a hearer of the word and not a doer, he is like a man who looks intently at his natural face in a mirror. 24 For he looks at himself and goes away and at once forgets what he was like. 25 But the one who looks into the perfect law, the law of liberty, and perseveres, being no hearer who forgets but a doer who acts, he will be blessed in his doing.*
*26 If anyone thinks he is religious and does not bridle his tongue but deceives his heart, this person's religion is worthless. 27 Religion that is pure and undefiled before God the Father is this: to visit orphans and widows in their affliction, and to keep oneself unstained from the world.*

Some think that bridling one's tongue is only on the field of gossiping. Now the definition of gossiping is very different from what most people think, to begin with. Gossiping entails *everything* one says about another person which has nothing to do with yourself. So if one would tell you about another person's new car, that could be a gossip, or someone's new girlfriend. In both of these cases the *intent* is probably important, but we still need to be careful about that. The intent is not to harm someone's reputation, but it might do that. Someone might wonder where this person got the money from to get that car and all kinds of thoughts could cross his mind, even if the one who told him did not had this intent when he said told him the news. As for the girlfriend, it could be a random girl he was with, but not necessarily his girlfriend? But even if she were his girlfriend, one could think why he has a new girlfriend so soon after he broke up with the previous one.
In the same way when we hear news about a movie star in gossip magazines, this is gossip as well, because it should not concern anyone what someone does, unless it is related to us. 
**Example.** I once liked a girl, but our pastor's wife told this girl's sister about how I was chasing girls in church. Was that a gossip or not? That is not a very clear line. On the one hand it had nothing to do with the pastor's wife, but on the other hand it had a lot to do with the sister who of course wanted to protect her little sister. Still, on the other hand one could imagine that a random woman in church with good intent would tell the pastor's wife about my behavior, so that the pastor's wife would warn the older sister, so that the older sister would warn the little sister. This already feels to be a bit out of line. 
The best thing to do for the pastor's wife and for anyone else would have been to confront me or warn this girl directly. The best thing to have done for the pastor's wife was for her to confront whoever told her about me and tell this person that she should not tell these things about fellow congregation members to the pastor, but first tell the person in question, that is I, about his behavior. Perhaps she did, I do not know that, but given the fact that she now already knows, should it be her responsibility to warn either of the two sisters? This is a difficult question. In court this kind of evidence obtained in the wrong way would not be valid and the jury would have to ignore this evidence (as if that were possible). In my opinion this law is wrong. When a person has killed someone, whether this was recorded in an illegal way or not, and admitted that on tape, this confession should count and he should be judged by it. I understand that the lawmakers do not want to encourage people to go for illegal ways to record people and invade their privacy, or that because law enforcement did something illegal by invading one's privacy for example by going through one's garbage, now this criminal is also allowed something in return. The bigger sin still counts and it is a bigger sin to kill someone and the end justifies the means in this case. 

#biblestudy/devotionals/james