# 1 John 2 (ESV)
***Christ Our Advocate***
*1 My little children, I am writing these things to you so that you may not sin. But if anyone does sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. 2 He is the ::propitiation:: for our sins, and not for ours only but also for the sins of the whole world. 3 And by this we know that we have come to know him, if we keep his commandments. 4 Whoever says “I know him” but does not keep his commandments is a ::liar::, and the truth is not in him, 5 but whoever keeps his word, in him truly the love of God is perfected.*

Once again the word "liar" appears here. If you say you keep God's commandments you are lying, but also if you say you know Him and do not keep His commandments. This seems to result in a strange conclusion because verse #todo/opzoeken  says that everyone is a sinner and hence no one keeps God's commandments. So this would mean that no one can say he knows God. In fact that is true, for no person, except Jesus Christ, knows God. But, see also v.5, the love of God is *perfected*, which to me seems as if His love is made perfect in us. His love is perfect in itself, but within us it is not, because we corrupt it. But for those who keep or try to keep or keep on keeping God's Word, in those persons God's love will express itself in an ever more perfect way.  

*By this we may know that we are in him: 6 whoever says he abides in him ought to walk in the same way in which he walked.*

The implication of this verse is clear: practice what you preach. One cannot act differently from what he says. Now even those who are part of the Free Grace "movement" #tags/theology/grace/hyper (Footnote: Officially this is not a movement such as the Word of Faith or that other movement described in American Gospel 2, but it looks very much like it. In the past few years since approximately 2010 I have seen this movement spread from the likes of Joel Osteen #tags/famouspeople , Joyce Meyer and Joseph Prince to many other churches, and where this was relatively unknown in The Netherlands, churches have sprung up like mushrooms #todo/opzoeken/engels in these years with at least two Hillsong churches (Amsterdam and Rotterdam), City Life Church (The Hague) and Mozaiek (Veenendaal) #todo/opzoeken/engels spelling, with an upcoming seven other churches, to name but a few) cannot deny what this verse says. 
They cannot claim that one is allowed to do otherwise than what he has said and they cannot claim that Jesus walked a sinful life, so that they can allow sin in their life as well. 

***The New Commandment***
*7 Beloved, I am writing you no new commandment, but an old commandment that you had from the beginning. The old commandment is the word that you have heard.*

This commandment to love one another is as old as the Law of Moses, which is both summarized from the Ten Commandments (the first four pointing to the love for God and the others to the love for others) as well as stated explicitly (in Deuteronomy 6:5 and Leviticus 19:18). At the same time it is new because Jesus had repeated it multiple times and even added unto that by commanding to love one another as He has loved us (John 13:34). 

*8 At the same time, it is a new commandment that I am writing to you, which is true in him and in you, because the darkness is passing away and the true light is already shining. 9 Whoever says he is in the light and hates his brother is still in darkness. 10 Whoever loves his brother abides in the light, and in him there is no cause for stumbling. 11 But whoever hates his brother is in the darkness and walks in the darkness, and does not know where he is going, because the darkness has blinded his eyes.*

Pay attention to the "does not know where is going"-part. The ones who walk in darkness think they know what they are doing, but they do not know the effects of their sin. Sometimes they will see the damage they have caused, when they regret their mistakes, the impact it cost on their siblings or children and those are the stories we hear of. *American History X* (starring Edward Norton #tags/famouspeople) is one of those movies #tags/movies about this kind of regret, which turned his kid brother into a neo-Nazi, but more often than not, the criminals see their own family change for the bad, such as in the Godfather, where the head of the family, Don Corleone, brings all of his sons into the "family business" of criminality, not even realizing until the end what he has done. Of course, if Don Corleone had known of his own mistakes he would have changed his ways, which he did not. So how can a criminal then see the sins of another criminal when he does not even see his own? 
In the movie he and his sons do see some mistakes made by Frodo, among others, and another one (the third #todo/opzoeken ) who goes into the drugs business, which is going too far. This brings some kind of regret, but not enough, because they are still blinded by the darkness they are walking in. 
Verse 11 is crucial in this. It warns us of hating our brothers and this alone is sufficient to let us, even us Christians, to walk in darkness. Whenever we hate someone we are blinded by our hatred, no matter how small our hatred is and we will not see our own sins. We could also be constantly influenced by our hatred in such a way that we do not even see our own hatred and sin anymore. It would be like growing up in a violent and gruesome place which would render any act of violence but a small matter compared to what usually happens, as in the case of hillbillies such as in the life stories of J.D. Vance as pictured in the movie #tags/movies *The Hillbilly Elegy*  or the life of David Wood #tags/famouspeople/christian which he speaks about in one of his YouTube videos.

Another way of falling into this blindness is by loving oneself too much. This automatically renders hatred through the size of the difference between love for one person and another, just as Jesus (probably) meant when He referred to the love for Him and the hatred for ones own parents and siblings. If the love for one person is so big, the love for another person will seem so small that it seems as if one hates the other. 

*12 I am writing to you, little children,*
*because your sins are forgiven for his name's sake.*
*13 I am writing to you, fathers,*
*because you know him who is from the beginning.*
*I am writing to you, young men,*
*because you have overcome the evil one.*
*I write to you, children,*
*because you know the Father.*
*14 I write to you, fathers,*
*because you know him who is from the beginning.*
*I write to you, young men,*
*because you are strong,*
*and the word of God abides in you,*
*and you have overcome the evil one.*

This poem repeats his addresses to three groups: children, fathers and young men. It seems as if John is not giving advise here, but rather exhorting these three with a final encouragement of *why* he is writing these things. 
The first time he clearly uses the present continuous, perhaps to indicate that this is what is happening right now, while the second time he uses the present simple to indicate its continuity. 
**Children.** He wants the children to know that they are forgiven, because they know the Father. Children need to feel this safety by *knowing* that they are forgiven and that both their heavenly Father as well as their Earthly father loves them. 
**Fathers.** As for fathers, their greatest job is to know the Lord. If they know God the Father as their own father they will live out fatherhood as they should do. Every man imitates in more or lesser ways the way he has been brought up as a child by his own father, and those who grew up without a father will live out what they have been taught instead by their mother, a teacher or a substitute father. 
Not only should fathers know God's character, they have to know that He is from the beginning, which means that He is the Creater of everything. This is a compulsory understanding of God's being. Without this God cannot be Almighty and All-knowing, for how could an almighty and all-knowing God Who did not create the universe know how the world was created?
**Young men.** John speaks to them in terms as if they have already reached it, although he too knows that young men will always struggle with many temptations. But he is encouraging them by telling them—assuming they believe in Christ because of this part "the word of God abides in you"—that they have already overcome the evil one (which is repeated twice for emphasis). 
Young men are easily discouraged. Whereas young children are encouraged by a feeling of safety and being loved, and fathers are encouraged by the simple task to simply know the Lord, because of their already overwhelmingly busy lives, young men are discouraged by their lack of self-confidence. John stimulates their confidence not in themselves, but in God's Word which is (i.e. it *abides*) already in them and they have *already* overcome the evil, even though they have not seemingly overcome this yet. 
#church/material

***Do Not Love the World***
*15 Do not love the world or the things in the world. If anyone loves the world, the love of the Father is not in him.*

Can a man love two women or can a woman love two men? It has often been depicted in movies where a woman cannot help herself but love two men simultaneously. In the movie *The Cider House Rules* Charlize Theron #tags/famouspeople/actors stars as the wife of a soldier who is often away and then falls in love with a doctor, played by Tom McGuire #todo/opzoeken. This might not be the right example for it could also be that the wife is compelled to go back to her husband out of loyalty. But let us assume that women are actualy capable of doing this. For men this would be easier to understand, but would it actually be possible for women? 
Verse 15 indicates that humans are not able to love the world and the Father at the same time, because these are dichotomous. In other words, there is nothing in the Father that is in the world. The world *says* that it cares about nature and the environment, but it only cares about money and have other purposes with the climate change, namely to control humanity and the number of people on Earth. The world claims to love the poor, but what little they have of empathy and compassion, they have from the Father—the rest is all due to selfishness or guilt. 
Now the question is whether two men are dichotomous and mutually exclusive. Often that is not the case. Both men could love the same woman and this woman could love both men and their traits. 
The fact that one man could love a woman even though she loves another man as well already is a compromise this man should not make. Both men should leave her and would leave her if they were like Jesus. Jesus does not accept any bride who partially loves another man. Yes, Jesus is willing to die for any person, whether this person loves Him or not, but that is the ἀγάπη (agape) love, i.e. His self-sacrificing love. But to love this person and be with her to eternity is on the brink of Ἔρως (*eros*) or in other words to marry that person as a man would marry his bride. 
Men have been compromised in this love and cannot distinguish real and genuine love as God has meant it from the love of the world. Can woman, however, love two men who are completely devoted to her? Here too we can use the example of Christ and His bride, but now the roles are reversed and the question is whether mankind could love two Gods at the same Who both love them, for example God and Allah. 
Let us say for the sake of argument that these two Gods have some things in common in terms of promises and the amount they love mankind. The argument in practice is easier because we know that only One can exist. Both claim to be the only God and if one believes in one God, then the other is automatically dismissed. However, in this example the woman could love both at the same time if she honestly thinks both men love her. However, if she really loves both men, she will still choose one man over the other, because letting them wait any longer than necessary would not be genuine love. 

Now carefully note what these verses say. It says that if one loves the world, the Father is not in him. This means that if the Father is in anyone, then this person will not love the world anymore, because his views will change so that he will hate this world. This is one aspect that we cannot inject into our examples, for in the example where two men love the same woman, one man cannot put his view into the woman's mind and so cause her not to love the other man anymore. He can only try to do this through external expressions, first of all, by being a better boyfriend than the other is for example and second of all, this only applies if the other has different values. For example, if one man loves steak and wants to cook a steak for the woman, the other man can show her that eating steak is not even healthy or good for the environment and in this way pull her to his side. But if both men have the same values, then this example does not apply of course.
In the case of two gods, however, where one is the Lord God Yahweh, there is *always* this distinction. Two men may be alike, but no one is ever like Yahweh or even near Him. So the difference between Yahweh and another God are clearly seen and God will even make these differences clear to those who do not see clearly. But if they still choose the world, which is the other god, then the Father is not in them and they are not able to love the Father unless He gives them another chance. 

*16 For all that is in the world—::the desires of the flesh and the desires of the eyes and pride of life::—is not from the Father but is from the world. 17 And the world is passing away along with its desires, but whoever does the will of God abides forever.* #biblestudy/memorization

There are multiple ways to interpret this verse: What is in the world are the 
1. desires of the flesh, and 
2. [Interpretations:]
	1. (the desires of the eyes) **and** (the desires of the pride of life); or 
	2. (the desires of the eyes) **and** (the pride of life); or 
	3. the desires of "the eyes and pride of life"
The first interpretation indicates that the pride of life also causes desires, the second interpretation claims that the pride of life is of three aspects in this world, and the third interpreations says that both the eyes and pride belong together. 
Literarily my interpretation would go to the second one, which would render verse 16 to mean that there are three things in this world: 
* what the flesh wants, that is lust and food and drugs and alcohol. In short, anything that satisfies the body and for which our body craves and can get addicted to. 
* what our eyes want. Naturally we want the things that look beautiful, so this would encompass jewelry, nice and fast cars and beautiful women or men as our partners—most of it things that money can buy. 
* what our spirit wants. We want to uplift ourselves, we do not want to be under anyone. If we are rich, we want to be richer than others. If we are smart, we wanted be smarter than others. If we are powerful, we want to be more powerful than others. We want others to *see* that we are better than they are, because that will make us proud.

One could say that the first and last interpretations are not all that wrong. Looking at my explanation above pride does cause desires and pride does want other eyes to turn toward him. 

***Warning Concerning Antichrists***
*18 Children, it is the last hour, and as you have heard that antichrist is coming, so now many antichrists have come. Therefore we know that it is the last hour.*

The definition of the antichrist will be given in verse 22. What is the last hour then? If Jesus said that "now" is the time for Him to die, while it would still take another day or more, #todo/opzoeken then the last hour will be much more than just a few weeks or months. On the other hand, the time has also begun for many antichrists to come and these have already come, as we know from history. 

*19 They went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of us, they would have continued with us. But they went out, ::that it might become plain that they all are not of us.::*

Is it not clear here that those who go out from Christians have never been Christians otherwise they would have *stayed* Christians, and it is exactly because they are not like Christians that they go out so that it becomes even more clear. #biblestudy/theology/calvinism/osas 

*20 But you have been anointed by the Holy One, and you all have knowledge. 21 I write to you, not because you do not know the truth, but because you know it, and because no lie is of the truth.*

John writes to these people, not tell them about the truth, because they already know it, but exactly *because* they know it. He also mentions that these lies cannot intermingle with the truth. A truth with even a fine grain of lie has become defiled and turned into a lie. Thus, John writes to the readers of this letter to prevent them from being influenced by this lie. It is exactly *because* they are still of the truth, that John does not want them to go lost. If a group of people were about to follow the wrong path, a Christian would probably first reach out to his fellow Christians to prevent them from going the wrong path, which would be easier than to warn the others who probably *want* to walk that other path.  

*22 Who is the liar but he who denies that Jesus is the Christ? ::This is the antichrist, he who denies the Father and the Son.::*

The antichrist is not just someone who denies that God exists, but he specifically denies the Father and the Son. What would John mean by this? There are many atheists who deny everything about God, both the fact that God exists and then of course also that God exists of three Persons. I have the feeling though that the antichrist (or *an* antichrist) knows what is meant with the Father and the Son and then denies these. So an antichrist knows that Jesus claims to be the Son of God, but they reject Him. In this case the antichrists would be Muhammad the prophet of Islam #tags/religion/islam and Joseph Smith Jr., the founder of Mormonism, #tags/religion/lds among others, who openly criticized the divinity of Jesus Christ Himself. However, it has been said the Nero too was one of the antichrists, although he never spoke of Christ as far as I know. On the other hand, he has persecuted God's children and whoever has done that has persecuted God Himself. 
This is in part explained by verse 23. Nero clearly did not want to know anything about Jesus Christ and Christians were clearly followers of Jesus Christ. So the same analogy applied from verse 23 of rejecting the Son can be applied to the rejection of Christians, who are both  children of the Father as well as "little Christs", i.e. the translation of the word "Christians."
 
*23 No one who denies the Son has the Father. Whoever confesses the Son has the Father also. 24 Let what you heard from the beginning abide in you. If what you heard from the beginning abides in you, then you too will abide in the Son and in the Father. 25 And this is the promise that he made to us—eternal life.*

The prerequisite for having eternal life is really simple. If what Jesus told you—that is the very basics of the Gospel—if that *abides* in you, then you have eternal life. Abiding entails that that Word is not only in your memory but also that you live it out. We do not have to think about the the Trinity or any other doctrine. All we need to accept is the Son, because then also the Father is accepted and the Holy Spirit and the Trinity and all other things as well. It would not go the other way around, for Jews accept the Father, but not the Son and the Trinity. 

*26 I write these things to you about those who are trying to deceive you. 27 But the anointing that you received from him abides in you, and you have no need that anyone should teach you. But as his anointing teaches you about everything, and is true, and is no lie—just as it has taught you, abide in him.*

John does not need to teach us, because Jesus' anointing is already teaching us, but he is simply confirming what the anointing already tell us to do, that is to abide in Jesus. 
#todo/nogaftemaken 

***Children of God***
*28 And now, little children, abide in him, so that when he appears we may have confidence and not shrink from him in shame at his coming.*

Of course the purpose of abiding in Jesus is not only so that we will not be afraid when He comes as judge and executioner. For #todo/opzoeken/engels tells us that love casts out all fear, which is written in the context of fear of judgment and condemnation by God. Moreover, even if that were our purpose, we would still shrink in shame, because everyone knows what he has done in the past or has even done *after* converting to Christianity. But the love we have in Jesus Christ is that we may know how much He loves us and is willing to forgive us according to this love. 

*29 If you know that he is righteous, you may be sure that everyone who practices righteousness has been born of him.*

This verse can be interpreted in two ways. The first one is that because God is righteous—that is He is righteousness Himself and the ultimate definition thereof— everyone who *practices* righteousness must come from Him. Where else would these people get their righteousness from? All of mankind's moral values, including righteousness, have been imbued on him by God and have not been invented him nor can they ever be attributed to him.
The second interpretation is that because God is righteous—that is He acts righteous— He will make everyone His child when the practice righteousness. Intuitively there is a point to this, for God would reward the righteous. However, there are many people in this world who are relatively righteous compared to man, such as Mahatma Gandhi #tags/famouspeople, who was, however, a very religious Hindu #tags/religion/hinduism who will not be saved because they reject the Son and hence also the Father (v.23), which is in stark contrast with this interpretation. Also, grammatically speaking, this interpretation would not be correct because the present perfect tells us that those practicing righteousness *have already been* been born of him. In that case—by definition—everyone who practices righteousness is a Christian so to speak and what Gandhi and the likes have done is not righteousness. 
What do we say then of such people who have seemingly sacrificed or at least dedicated their lives for good causes such as Nelson Mandela, Malcom X, Gandhi, Diane Fossey #tags/famouspeople  (whose lives are pictured in the eponymous movies *Mandela, long walk to freedom*, #tags/movies *Malcolm X*, starring Denzel Washington, *Gandhi*, starring Ben Kingsley and *Gorillas in the Mist* starring Sigourney Weaver #tags/famouspeople/actors, respectively)? Some of them have committed crimes. Mandela for example has killed and tortured people (even if this were for a good cause, this would still deserve punishment), both Malcolm X and Gandhi promoted other religions that led people away from God, and Jane Goodall, claiming to be a Christian, had a distorted view of God as an "Intelligence" and "Supreme Being" and as the "unknown and unknowable Creator" yet at the same time endowing natural evolution. In short, these people need a Savior as well and even though their current or last deeds were righteous—albeit with some self-centeredness as no one (according to James D. Kennedy #tags/famouspeople/christian at least) can completely give anything out of altruism or pure worship of God—they need forgiveness for all of their previous unrighteous deeds. 

#biblestudy/devotionals/1john