# 1 John 3 (ESV)
*1 See what kind of love the Father has given to us, that we should be called children of God; and so we are. The reason why the world does not know us is that it did not know him.*

With "what kind" is not meant the amount of love but the type of love, and the love that Christians have is different from that of the world. That is why the world does not recognize Christian love. Some aspects such as charity and social work they do accept, because that helps the body, when Christians feed the poor and provide housing and healthcare. But when it comes to psychological or mental care on marriage (i.e. not to divorce), life (i.e. not to abort babies or commit euthanasia) or sex (i.e. that heterosexuality is the right and moral thing) they do not think we are charitable nor correct. 
That is why when Christians pray for the LGBT-community this is not seen by the world as helping them. When Christians try to convert gays to become straight again and urge transsexuals (who are misnamed "transgenders" because the word "gender" is and has always had the same meaning as "sex", but the LGBT-community claims otherwise) not to undergo surgery, the world sees Christians as bigots. #tags/lgbt
Their definition of love has been morally corrupted, however, and they do not know God. Some do, eventually through the grace of God, and see that this world has been lying to them. 

*2 Beloved, we are God's children now, and what we will be has not yet appeared; but we know that when he appears we shall be like him, because we shall see him as he is.*

Again, I have two different interpretations on this. The first one is that we currently are not as Jesus is, but when He comes we shall change and become like Him. Why? Because we shall see him. Personally, I think the explanation in the last sentence is a bit strange, because merely seeing Jesus as He really is, will not change us to be like Him. It might change something, such as Nathaniël followed Jesus when he saw Him and spoke to Him. Many were impressed by Jesus teaching, just like many were impressed by the teaching of the Buddha #tags/religion/buddhism some (but not many) were impressed by Muhammad #tags/religion/islam. But Jesus cannot be compared with these leaders for His impression has been far greater and will be even greater still when comes the second time. 
The second interpretation I have is that when Jesus appears we will know that we are are like Him. This means that right now we do not know whether we are like Him, because we cannot see Him. Perhaps some of us are like Him and others are not, but when He comes, then we can definitely say we are like Him, because then we can see Him as He is. In my view, however, this interpretation is wrong as well.
What does this verse then actually mean? #biblestudy/questions What I do know, is that we will eventually become like Jesus. At the end of this world—or for others who pass away before the end this will be sooner—we will taken up to heaven or to the New Earth where we will be stripped away from our sinful bodies and from the sins on our souls. I do no understand the word "because" in this sentence, however, because I do not see the causal relationship between these two parts of verse 2. Could the answer be in verse 3? 

*3 And everyone who thus hopes in him purifies himself as he is pure.*

The word "thus" probably elaborates on the word "because" in the previous verse. Every Christian knows that he will see Christ one day and that Christ wants to see him blameless and holy, without wrinkle or spot (Ephesians 5:27). Therefore everyone who hopes in Jesus' return will purify himself. 
This clarifies why every Christian will purify himself and that by the time Christ has come everyone will be more pure than he is right now. However, that would not explain why we will be as Jesus is. We would never be like that by our own strength. 

*4 Everyone who makes a practice of sinning also practices lawlessness; sin is lawlessness. 5 You know that he appeared in order to take away sins, and in him there is no sin. 6 No one who abides in him keeps on sinning; no one who keeps on sinning has either seen him or known him.*

Let this be another reminder that those who *keep on sinning* have *never* known Jesus. They have not fallen from the faith, but they simply did not know Him. #biblestudy/theology/calvinism/osas/lordship 

*7 Little children, let no one deceive you. Whoever practices righteousness is righteous, as he is righteous. 8 Whoever makes a practice of sinning is of the devil, for the devil has been sinning from the beginning.*

Concerning the deceiving. On the one hand it seems as if John is telling the reader that the righteous person should not be deceived. If he is practicing righteousness, he should know that he is righteous. This might be a hint to orthodox denominations where hypercalvinism is present, that is a system of Calvinism with predestination but presented in such a way that people have been predestined and can change nothing about their destinations #biblestudy/theology/predestination/election#. Both the Gospel and heaven are brought as beautiful things, but only for those who have been predestined. So the impact of these congregations is that some work really hard, whilst staying in doubt as to whether they have been saved, and others do not do their best (perhaps a little for outer appearance) because they think their fate has been sealed anyway. 
#tags/theology/grace/hyper 
On the other hand, John also wants the sinner to know that he is not saved if he keeps practicing sin, whether he (thinks he) has been predestined or not. For one who has been predestined will not sin, for God would not choose a perpetual sinner who refuses to repent as His child. 

*The reason the Son of God appeared was to destroy the works of the devil.*

#todo/opzoeken are "works" and "practice" the same word in Greek? 
All that the devil does, is sin. The one who practices sin thus does the work of the devil. Jesus came to destroy the work of the devil. This means that the ones who practised sin will do no such thing anymore. 
Jesus will stop the work of the devil in two ways. He stops *him*—as He will do as described in Revelations by putting him in a well #todo/opzoeken/engels for a thousand years, but shortly after that permanently—but he also stops the *work*, which if it is not done by the devil it is done by sinners. And this He stops by stopping the sinner, that is He punishes the unrighteous, or He lets the sinner stop sinning by touching their hearts and opening their eyes so that they may be reborn and will stop sinning, but see the next verse and the notes there. 

*9 No one born of God makes a practice of sinning, for God's seed abides in him; and he cannot keep on sinning, because he has been born of God.*

In our core we are all bad, so let us say we have a bad core. This core can break, which happens when people say that their heart is broken. Then inside this core God can put a seed. If the ground is suited this seed will grow and when it does, the bad core can do nothing else but decrease. It is like a cancer overtaking a healthy organ and even though the organ is still just as large, the size of the cancer is so large that the size of the organ is minimal compared to it. Aside from that, this cancer can and will block the organ from working. Only in this case, the cancer is the seed of God, which will grow and infest the bad core and minimize it and stop it from working. It will always remain there, but it will not work anymore. 
The same principle also goes for sin in the life of an unbeliever. When an unbeliever who lives a relatively moral life allows sin to get into his heart, it will grow and infest and stop the relatively good core he had (cf. James 1:14).
So just like a sinful person cannot stop sinning, so a believer cannot keep on sinning, because the seed keeps on growing in him and will take him over. Yes, it is true that cancer grows slower in older people and the elderly usually die of age instead of of the cancer itself, but still, it grows evermore for as long as we are still alive. #church/material/sermon

*10 By this it is evident who are the children of God, and who are the children of the devil: whoever does not practice righteousness is not of God, nor is the one who does not love his brother.*

We can take all kinds of theological doctrines in argumenting whether one is saved or not, but the practical litmus test is really simple: those who keep sinning are not. Those who are, are described in verse 7. 

***Love One Another***
*11 For this is the message that you have heard from the beginning, that we should love one another. 12 We should not be like Cain, who was of the evil one and murdered his brother. And why did he murder him? Because his own deeds were evil and his brother's righteous.*

Cain did not become evil after he killed Abel, but he already was evil. It really takes one to give himself up to the evil one in order to kill an innocent person. Cain knew it was wrong, but his hatred was so big that he decided he had rather give himself over to evil than to admit his wrong (Genesis 4:7). 
Even before killing him, however, Cain's deeds were already evil. Perhaps this is referring to Cain's offer to God (Genesis 4:3) but it could also refer to his other deeds. God will not accept an offer from a person who does evil deeds, no matter how big the offer is, if that person does not repent from his own deeds first #todo/opzoeken add verse about putting your sacrifice before the altar, and making up with anyone who has anything against you, let alone you against anyone else or in this case one's own evil deeds. Also add a verse about the Holy Supper. #todo/opzoeken 
In the same way one may not partake in the Holy Supper when he has not repented of his sins and if he does, he might get sick or die. 

What is also noticeable about this verse is that not only Cain's evil deeds are mentioned but his brother's righteous deeds as well. One's evil deeds might lead one to murder another, but  this tension arises especially in cases where the contrast between good and evil is higher. Cain probably would not have killed Abel if his offer had not been accepted by God. Envy arose and from that anger and then hatred. He allowed sin to enter his heart instead of listening to God's advice (Genesis 4:7). 

*13 Do not be surprised, brothers, that the world hates you. 14 We know that we have passed out of death into life, because we love the brothers. Whoever does not love abides in death.*

The reason we have passed from death into life, that is from eternal death to eternal life in Christ, which is partially starting right now in our earthly lives, is because we love other Christians (I think that is meant here by "the brothers"). Of course the direct reason is that Jesus released us by paying the debt that was due to God, that is why we have been set free. But the reason why Jesus would do this is because we loved Him. It does not say that Jesus released us because we believed in Him or confessed His Name, although the Bible does mention that elsewhere (cf. Romans 10:9) but it does not exclude that prerequisite either, rather yet it adds unto this prerequisite not as an additional prerequisite but as an explanation, such as "you have to love your wife *and be good to her*". The italicized part is of course a *consequence* of loving one's wife. 
So it is because we love Jesus and recognize Him as our Lord and Savior, that is why we love our brothers as well, because if we love Him and God as our Father, we will love His other children as well. 
This is not always true in practice where we see brothers loving their father very much, even in the case of Jacob's eleven sons who did love him, but not their own little brother Joseph. But that is the practice where the brothers loved themselves more than their father and hence rather hurt their father than that their wrath was not quenched. 
In theory, however, perfect love for a person will never cause one to hurt that person's beloved. So—in *theory*—when a man loves his wife he will also love his mother-in-law, but we know that in practice this is not the case.

*15 ::Everyone who hates his brother is a murderer::, and you know that no murderer has eternal life abiding in him.*

#todo  aan Gerard vertellen
In #todo/opzoeken Matthew it says that those who look at another woman with lust in their eyes have committed adultery or are *like* adulterers, and something analogous for murdering one's brother when he has made him out for *raca*. This verse, however, is clear that this sinner is not *like* a murderer but actually *is* one. 
Perhaps the sin is accounted differently in God's eyes—we do not know that—and God will punish accordingly, but our *status* in God's eyes remains the same: we are murderers, thieves, liars and adulterers (and even more than that). Not all have lied or adulterated as much as the other, but we have all done so. 

*16 By this we know love, that he laid down his life for us, and we ought to lay down our lives for the brothers. 17 But if anyone has the world's goods and sees his brother in need, yet closes his heart against him, how does God's love abide in him? 18 Little children, let us not love in word or talk but in deed and in truth.*
*19 By this we shall know that we are of the truth and reassure our heart before him; 20 for whenever our heart condemns us, God is greater than our heart, and he knows everything. 21 Beloved, if our heart does not condemn us, we have confidence before God; 22 and whatever we ask we receive from him, because we keep his commandments and do what pleases him.*

Many ask themselves how they can know whether they are of the truth. For this reason we have a conscience which probably is what John means when he uses the term "heart." Whenever our heart condemns us, we know we have done something wrong. Apparently the heart knows what is right and wrong. 
**Example.** Setting aside the concept of the Holy Spirit for just a minute for someone who does not believe in God or in the Trinity, how would this heart or conscience know whether something is right or wrong? It must have been programmed to know the difference. The moral rules have been hardcoded within the code itself or at least in a package containing data on this code. *Google Translate* also provides offline translations, but when it comes to difficult words, rare words or combined words, new words or long sentences, it needs extra information from online sources which are up-to-date with the latest jargon, (urban) dictionaries perhaps, user input and AI-translations. In other words, Google Translate works better online. #todo/familytime
In the same way our heart c.q. conscience has a way to determine whether something is wrong or not, but it has a better way of doing that when it is connected to God the Father Who can tell in any and every situation, no matter how specific, what is the right thing to do. He uses no dictionaries but His own Word, he does not have artificial intelligence but wisdom to provide the answer. God Himself *is* the One to Whom our heart if connected. This is what it means when John says "God is greater than our heart"—God knows every search and request done by the heart and He knows when our heart has condemned us. 
This is a different search from that in Psalm 139:23, because I am implying that the heart does a search in its database and if it cannot find the answer it sends out a request "online" to God Who then provides for this. The psalmist, David, however, calls for God to search his heart to see if there are any condemnations. Verse 22 of this book is based on this confidence of David who knew that his heart did not condemn him, at the time of writing this Psalm at least. At the same time, though, David asks God for His leading in Psalm 139:24, meaning that if there is any sin that God shows him this sin so that he can deal with it. 

*23 And this is his commandment, that we believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ and love one another, just as he has commanded us. 24 Whoever keeps his commandments abides in God, and God in him. And by this we know that he abides in us, by the Spirit whom he has given us.*

The whole chapter is about explanations and a logical reasoning is explicity given through the following interlinking verses. The part before v.11 is about being children of God and this verse starts with the reason that we have received this message: (v.11) we have to love each other. (v.16) Love is to lay down one's life for one another and not just talk about it, but do it in truth. (v.19) We are of the truth if our heart does not condemnn us, which happens when we keep His commandments (v.21-22) to love one another. Only then God is in us, which we can confirm by the Holy Spirit, Who can be distinguished by those who listen to Christians and those who do not (4:6). 

#biblestudy/devotionals/1john