# Hebrews 7 (LSB)
### The Priesthoods of Melchizedek and Christ
**Heb. 7:1**   For this aMELCHIZEDEK, KING OF SALEM, PRIEST OF THE bMOST HIGH GOD, who met ABRAHAM AS HE WAS RETURNING FROM THE SLAUGHTER OF THE KINGS and BLESSED HIM, **2** aTO WHOM ALSO ABRAHAM APPORTIONED A TENTH PART OF ALL, was first of all, by the translation*of his name*, king of righteousness, and then also king of Salem, which is king of peace. **3** Without father, without mother, awithout genealogy, having neither beginning of days nor end of life, but made like bthe Son of God, he remains a priest continually.

One wonders where this information about Melchizedek comes from. It is probably not written in the Jewish commentaries on the Tenach, or from oral tradition (I would need to look it up, but I have never read anything about traditions concerning Melchizedek #todo/opzoeken ), but somehow the author knows about this. Most likely these were given to the author by divine revelation, but if that were the case, the unbelieving Hebrews would have stumbled over v.3, for on what base could the author claim that Melchizedek was **without father [and] mother**? 
It is almost impossible to separate Melchizedek from Jesus Christ. They are both king and priest—and the only ones who are so! (Footnote: There are other king-priests, but within other religions. Within the worship of the God Most High, which is our God, Yahweh (cf. Genesis 22:14-18) there was no king until Saul, and when there were kings, these roles were strictly separated, so much even that Saul, who as king sacrificed an animal instead of letting this be done by Samuel (who was a prophet #todo/opzoeken who was the priest then and were prophets allowed to do this? Yes, because Samuel had done this before (or after #todo/opzoeken ) during the anointing of David and Gideon was commanded to burn a bull (Judges 6:26)) lost God's favor #todo/opzoeken or blessing, and his royal bloodline ended there.)—they are king of righteousness and peace. However, Melchizedek was **made like the Son of God**. What would this "like" mean, but that he was not actually the Son of God, but only *like* it? However, in Philippians 2:7 we read that Jesus was "made *in the likeness* of men". We know Jesus *was* one hundred percent human and not "*like* a human." So perhaps this "like" should not literally be interpreted this way and thus we can conclude that Melchizedek and Jesus Christ are one and the same persons. 

**Heb. 7:4**   Now observe how great this man was TO WHOM ABRAHAM, the apatriarch, bGAVE A TENTH of the spoils. **5** And those indeed of athe sons of Levi, who receive the priest’s office, have a commandment 1in the Law to collect 2a tenth from the people, that is, from their brothers, although these 3are descended from Abraham. **6** But the one awhose genealogy is ::not traced from them:: had bcollected 1a tenth from Abraham and 2cblessed the one who dhad the promises. **7** But without any dispute the lesser is blessed by the greater. **8** And in this case mortal men receive tithes, but in that case one *receives them*, aof whom it is witnessed that he lives on. **9** And, so to speak, through Abraham even Levi, who received tithes, paid tithes, **10** for he was still in the loins of his father when Melchizedek met him.

This is an argument that there is an entity higher than the Levites and thus even higher than the priests, for these are Levites as well and also need to tithe. This tithing then of course is given to God, but because God had no physical presence on Earth, this tithe was stored in the temple treasury #todo/opzoeken  echt zo? Abraham, however, who encompasses all tribes, gave his tithe to Melchizedek. So if Melchizedek had been present in the temple, the Levites had to give their tithe to him, and all people of all tribes as well (or through the Levites). But the only Person worthy of receiving the Levite's tithing was God, so this means that Melchizedek *was* God, not as a typology but as an early christophany. 
We must consider why Abraham gave a *tenth of all* of his possession (Genesis 14:20), not a tenth of his *income* which was common for the Israelites. It is God to Whom we need to give a tenth of everything we have, and we do this through our monthly income. But Abraham did not give a tenth of his income, he gave a tenth of everything he had, which perhaps was because he thought that he would never meet Melchizedek again. 

**Heb. 7:11**   aNow if perfection was through the Levitical priesthood (for on the basis of it bthe people received the Law), what further need*was there* for another priest to arise caccording to the order of Melchizedek, and not be designated according to the order of Aaron? **12** For when the priesthood is changed, of necessity there takes place a change of law also. **13** For athe one concerning whom bthese things are spoken belongs to another tribe, from which no one has officiated at the altar. **14** For it is evident that our Lord 1was adescended from Judah, a tribe with reference to which Moses spoke nothing concerning priests. **15** And this is clearer still, if another priest arises according to the likeness of Melchizedek, **16** who has become*such* not according to a law of 1aphysical requirement, but according to the power of ::ban:: indestructible life. **17** For it is witnessed*about Him*, 
	“aYOU ARE A PRIEST FOREVER 
	ACCORDING TO THE ORDER OF MELCHIZEDEK.”

We are at a point in the rhetoric where certain points have already been proven and can be assumed. It has been shown (#todo/opzoeken  ?) that Melchizedek lives forever and *was* God Himself. Here, however, v.11 makes the *assumption* that another priest has risen who is of *another* order and not **according to the order of Aaron**. It *assumes* that Jesus is a priest. I would say this is a difficult step for unbelieving Jews, but as mentioned before, the three possible types receivers of this letter were all believing Jews, but just not necessarily having accepted Jesus as their Savior. So therefore this assumption can be made. 
Now in v.12 another statement is made that **when the priesthood is changed, of necessity there takes place a change of law also**, but on what basis can this be stated? This has never happened before, or so it seems. We know that certain people sacrificed to God and God accepted their offer. Because of this they could be regarded as priests. Abraham sacrificed and he had a Law that was different from that of Moses. First of all, he did not have the Mosaic Law, but also, we see that Abraham married his sister—and we assume Abraham was obedient to God—while in Leviticus 18:9 this later was forbidden. 
For those wondering about why God allowed this for Abraham (and the people of his time) but not for people living in Moses' time, this is because Moses lived about 500 years before Moses. Abraham was much closer to Noah and Adam's. Between Adam and Noah there were seven  #todo/opzoeken  generations, and between Noah and Abraham ... generations. The number of changes in the DNA between these generations was significantly less, because DNA changes with every generation. After many more generations, however—there are #todo/opzoeken generations between Abraham and Moses—the DNA of the people were so much deteriorated that the risk of incurring hereditary illnesses due to incest was significant, where the threshold value (the so-called P-value) of "significance" is determined by God. This is shown by the fact that in the days of Abraham people lived much shorter lives than in Noah's days, but still longer than Moses did. For example, Abraham was 180 years old when he died #todo/opzoeken  but Moses only 120 #todo/opzoeken/reference  years (Footnote: The *Israelite* people in Moses' days lived much shorter in Moses himself, but that was because of malnourishment and the harsh treatment of Israelite slaves in Egypt, which is shown in the documentary #tags/movies *Exodus* #todo/opzoeken/reference.)  old. This fact alone shows the quality of Moses' DNA (Footnote: Abraham and Moses both could have been exceptions of extreme longevity or short-livedness, but assuming a somewhat normal shaped distribution of life spans, the statistical mean, median and mode would all still be far apart from each other, even when considering the fact that Moses was fit enough to live in and walk through the desert and daily led a group of approximately two million people by the time he was taken away. If he had not been taken away, one might assume that he would have died a natural death approximately two decades later. Furthermore, for a stronger proof of the life span in Abraham's days we can also look at the longevity of Abraham's progeny.). In any case, it is clear that the Law of Moses was different than the Law given to Abraham, which was probably the Noahic Law.
As for Noah, he was a priest in the sense described above, for he offered directly to God—as Abraham did, even putting his son Isaac on the altar, and later the provided ram, at one time—after the Flood and received a Law and a new covenant (Genesis 8:20ff), different from the one Adam received.
Now it is clear that Adam, who could also be considered priest, received a different covenant than Noah—there is no mentioning of anyone sacrificing to God in between, but even if there were, we may assume they were of the same priesthood. Noah, however, was of the same "tribe" as Adam, for he was his descendant, but a specific covenant was made with each of them as well as with Moses. 
Now if Melchizedek was merely a human being, he would have been under the Noahic covenant and descended from Noah, just like anyone else. He and Abraham would then both have been priests and sacrificing to God, but we see that Abraham tithed to Melchizedek, and Melchizedek blessed Abraham, of whom is clearly shown by these two facts that he is the **lesser** (v.7). Now if Abraham is of the same *order* as Noah, because of their lineage, but of another *priesthood*—because Abraham too was allowed to sacrifice and had received his own covenant—to whom was Abraham then tithing? There is only possible answer here, and that is God. It does not matter whether Abraham was a priest under the covenant of Noah or his own. He was, for sure, not one under Melchizedek offering his tithes to him, which Melchizedek would then offer to God. 
Could it be that Melchizedek was a priest under the covenant and priesthood of Noah, and that the covenant with Abraham had not been established yet? It would make sense then that Abraham was to give his tithes to any priests under this priesthood, but since he probably had never met one, because there were so few, he had saved all of his tithes for this moment, and gave a tenth of all he had, because he would probably never see him again. 

**Heb. 7:18**   For, on the one hand, there is a setting aside of a former commandment abecause of its weakness and uselessness **19** (for athe Law made nothing perfect), and on the other hand there is a bringing in of a better bhope, through which we cdraw near to God. **20** And inasmuch as *it was* not without an oath **21** (for they indeed became priests without an oath, but He with an oath through the One who said to Him, 
	“aTHE 1LORD HAS SWORN 
	AND bWILL NOT CHANGE HIS MIND, 
	‘YOU ARE A PRIEST cFOREVER’”);

**Heb. 7:22**   so much more Jesus also has become the ::aguarantee:: of ba better covenant.

This part is concluding that there are two reasons why the old covenant was removed. 
* the former commandment was set aside **because of its weakness and uselessness**. If there were no better alternative, then this old commandment would be used, but 
* there is a **better hope**, which is the **better covenant** of Jesus. 
**Example.** Perhaps we can explain this through an example of the VHS (video) tapes. Even when there was no alternative, they already were bad. People just did not have any other choice. VHS tapes were single-sided, low quality, slow, often got jammed, the quality deteriorated, were big and took up a lot of space, and needed to be rewinded after watching. This is the first reason these needed to be set aside. 
But Betamax or Philips 2000 tapes were much better. These were double-sided and thus did not need to be rewinded, but only flipped. In theory these could have been made twice as small or contain twice the quality for the same size, because they contained twice the data. #todo/opzoeken These tapes were good, however, no matter how good they were, they would still be set aside for the next revolution in multimedia storage—the Laser Disc, VCD and later on the DVD. 

**Heb. 7:23**   And 1the *former* priests, on the one hand, existed in greater numbers because they were prevented by death from continuing, **24** but *Jesus*, on the other hand, because He continues aforever, holds His priesthood permanently. **25** Therefore He is able also to asave ::1forever:: those who bdraw near to God through Him, since He ::always lives:: to cmake intercession for them.

Quantity is not more important than quality. Even the former priests, though they were with many, could only save people for a short while. But Jesus, all by Himself, could save all of humanity, before and after His incarnation, for eternity. 
Each priest would stop making intercession for us after he had died. There were times when people had lives through more than five high priests #todo/opzoeken 

Here is a list of why Jesus *as high priest* is better than those of the Levitical priesthood. 
1. He saves **forever**, while high priests do not save at all and even if they do, they do this only do this while they themselves are alive.
2. He can save us by Himself, while many priests are needed to save us, because priests die all the time. 
3. He can save *all in the world*, while priests would not even have enough time to make intercession for all people. 
4. He does not need **to offer up sacrifices [...] for His own sins**, because He is **holy, innocent, undefiled**.
5. He does not need to offer **daily [...] because this He did once for all**.
6. Others **became priests without an oath, but He with an oath**.
7. **Jesus also has become the guarantee of a better covenant**.

**Heb. 7:26**   For it was fitting for us to have such a ahigh priest, bholy, cinnocent, undefiled, separated from sinners and dexalted above the heavens; **27** who does not need daily, like those high priests, to aoffer up sacrifices, bfirst for His own sins and then for the *sins* of the people, because this He did conce for all when He doffered up Himself. **28** For the Law appoints men as high priests awho are weak, but the word of the oath, which came after the Law, *appoints*ba Son, who has been cmade perfect forever.

Why then was this **fitting for us**? We did not deserve this, so in that sense it was not fitting for us at all to have any priest, let alone a high priest who is **holy, innocent, undefiled**, etc. What is meant here is that this high priest does not fit or grandeur, but rather our lack of it. Jesus is the only One Who fits our needs. We are the exact opposite of this description of Jesus. We are far from holy and wholly committed to God, but rather committed to the world and had become friends with it, until He saved us from it. We are not innocent but we have committed crimes on a level that deserve multiple capital punishments. We are not undefiled but defiled in every way. Even the best and youngest among us are defiled in their thoughts. And even though we cannot imagine a young girl having for example sexually defiled thoughts, even the slightest nudge toward a thought, when multiplied by a multiplier of an infinite size, will be an infinitely great sin. What more can we say about ourselves? Is there anything good we can boast? No there is, for our sins bury all of our efforts and good intentions, and even that which we have done what could be perceived as good, is not good at all in the eyes of the Lord, for He looks at the heart and He knows that we are driven by selfishness, pride and greed.

#tags/bible/hebrews
#biblestudy/devotionals/hebrews



#todo 
Ramon vertellen
* waarom biologisch -> christelijk
	* diervriendelijk 
	* volledig spectrum aan aminozuren en mineralen (voedingsstoffen uit de grond)
	* gezonder voor jou
