# Hebrews 5 (LSB)

> 1For every high priest taken from among men is appointed on behalf of men in things pertaining to God, in order to offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins, 2being able to deal gently with the ignorant and misguided, since he himself also is beset with weakness; 3and because of it, he is obligated, just as for the people, to also offer *sacrifices* for sins in the same way for himself. 4And no one takes this honor to himself, but *receives it* when he is called by God, even as Aaron was.  

It was and is necessary for a high priest that he is **able to deal gently with the ignorant and misguided**. Just like it was necessary for the family to sacrifice a sheep only when they had felt the intimacy with it after having had it in their home for a few days, so the high priest needs to understand what he is sacrificing and why and how big the sacrifice is. A person who cannot pray sincerely to God is not allowed to sacrifice anything to God and neither is the one who does not understand the meaning of the sacrifice.
However, the paradox in this is that the only persons who are able to deal gently with sinners are those who have sinned themselves as well, and hence the priest needs to **offer sacrifices for sins [...] for himself** as well. There is but one exception, and that is Jesus Christ, Who understands all the temptations of man and was born in the likeness and weakness of man, but who never sinned (cf. Hebrews 4:15, Philippians 2:7-8, 1 John 3:5). 
Perhaps I can explain why it is necessary to have this perfect high priest, Jesus Christ. Man keeps on sinning—all the time. Less than a single second after a sacrifice has been made for us at the altar, we have become sinful again—if we ever had been clean (to which answer is "not", of course). Now the high priest himself is unclean as well and therefore he needs to sacrifice for himself first, but even after sacrificing, he is immediately unclean again. So there is an unclean high priest who touches and defiles the sacrifice meant to atone for us. The sacrifice—if it is even accepted by God—will then have become less worth (if you will) and it will atone for even less than that for us, because part of its worth will go to the high priest himself as well, because of his own sins. 
It is as if the high priest offers a batch of sticky dough, but because of his dirty hands that part needs to be cut off of the offer, and of what is left, half is used to atone for the priest's sin and the rest for one who gave the offer. Of course half of less than a whole batch can never atone for all of one's sin—not even for a person's sins of only that day itself—and the person needs to come back again and again, but will heap up sin faster than he can ever atone for. 
With Jesus Christ as the high priest this is different, however, for He is clean, and this High Priest provides the sacrificial lamb himself (cf. "Yahweh-jireh" in Genesis 22:8,14) as well! This lamb is undefiled and it is perfect. It is of such high grade that it can atone for a multitude of sins, and it is so great (i.e. big) that it is unlimited in the number of people it can atone for.  

A small sidestep to the doctrine of Limited Atonement #biblestudy/theology/calvinism/limitedatonement which says that Jesus did not die for those who have not been elected by God, or in other words, those who have not chosen for God by the end of their lives. Proponents argue that Jesus suffered a certain amount of punishment equal to the sum of punishment that all of the elect would have borne and no more than that. The example of Jesus as the lamb Himself, however, would indicate that the blood of the lamb would have been able to cover the sins of all of man. Now suppose the lamb is able to cover the sins of 100 billion people (supposing that each person transgressed the same amount) and all of humanity has only produced 50 billion people in history, from Adam to the last person ever born. How would this lamb then be sacrificed? Would only half of it be put on the altar? Of course not, for the lamb would still be 100 percent dead. Would the lamb then be tortured until it has suffered sufficiently for half of mankind and then died a painless death? That would not adhere to Jewish law where lambs need to die as painless as possible. Their artery needs to be cut, which is minimal in pain, and all of their blood needs to flow out, so that the lamb faints and dies while being unconscious. 
Or do proponents say that this is exactly what happened to Jesus? He was tortured from a certain moment on and only when it was finished did He say so and breathed out His last breath. Perhaps Jesus would have been alive for another few hours if He were to have carried the punishments of the sin of all who are not elect. 
However, this reasoning would go against the perfectness of God's numbering. Some say that Jesus' punishment already started from His birth on as soon as He felt the difference between living on Earth and in Heaven (see also the comparison with Superman in [[Hebrews 2 (LSB)]]) .  God let Jesus live for 33 years on Earth, which is a number that has a specific meaning, and He let Him hang on the cross for #todo/opzoeken/reference hours, which also has a specific meaning.

The number 33 can be composed in two ways. The first way is that it is the addition of the duration of two events: Jesus being 30 years of age—when He started His ministry—and His ministry itself—which lasted 3 years (some say 3.5 years).  30 is 3 times 10, and the 3 is the number representing the Trinity, and 10 the number of human completeness. Jeremiah also started his ministry when he was 30 and priests were only allowed to start their service at this age. 
If the duration of Jesus' ministry was 3.5 years, this could also indicate half of 7, which is God's perfect number. Just like in Revelation, the first period, consisting of 3.5 years, are with Jesus, where things are better, but in the second period things will go worse. 
This number, 33, could also be composed of 3 times 11, which is more intuitive, because the Bible usually uses multiplications of numbers instead of additions. 11 is the number of chaos, which is also described in Steve Cioccolanti's #tags/famouspeople/christian book #tags/books *The Divine Code (Volume 1)*). 33 would then indicate the ultimate chaos and judgment. Where Noah and his sons were the eleventh generation, counted from Adam, and chaos and judgment came over the world in the form of a flood, Jesus' death caused judgment over all of man before and after His death, to anyone Who rejected Him.

This also might answer the question of why Jesus proclaimed His victory to the generation of Noah #todo/opzoeken/reference . David Pawson #church/sermons/@davidpawson #tags/famouspeople/christian mentioned that a possible explanation was that the generation of Noah had not had a "fair" chance and were annihilated by the Flood. Therefore, Jesus went and proclaimed to them the Gospel. It was not that they would still get the chance to repent, but they would have at least heard the Gospel then. 
My answer would be that all generations until, but not including, Noah would have been governed and judged by a pro-Noahitic #todo/opzoeken/engels  Noahic? law or principle and were eventually condemned by the Flood. All generations starting from Noah, however, would have been judged—*symbolically*—under the judgment of Jesus. #todo/nogaftemaken  Of course Jesus' judgment applies to all of mankind, regardless of whether they lived in the pre- or post-Flood period and whether they have heard the Gospel or not. But symbolically one could say that all generations who died before the Flood had the chance to follow God according a certain law and were allowed to #todo/opzoeken/engels gebruik maken van this chance until the very last day of their lives and the generations after the Flood had the same opportunity. But the generation that experienced the Flood had all died #todo/opzoeken/engels voortijdig. Of course we know this logic does not apply because the people had listened to Noah's preaching and warnings and did not enter the Ark, and the people who had never heard Noah's preaching were still under a universal law, written on their hearts (cf. Romans 1 #todo/opzoeken/reference ). But that is also why Jesus went to the generation of Noah to proclaim His victory, *symbolically* if you will, for they could not be saved anymore. #todo/opzoeken 

> 5In this way also Christ did not glorify Himself to become a high priest, but He who said to Him,  
> “You are My Son,  
> Today I have begotten You”;  
> 6just as He says also in another *passage*,  
> “You are a priest forever  
> According to the order of Melchizedek.”  
> 7He, in the days of His flesh, offered up both prayers and supplications with loud crying and tears to the One able to save Him from death, and He was ::heard:: because of His reverence. 8Although He was a Son, He ::learned:: obedience from the things which He suffered. 9And having been ::made:: perfect, He became to all those who obey Him the source of eternal salvation, 10being designated by God as a high priest according to the order of Melchizedek.  

#todo/nogaftemaken priests had requirements, as mentioned above, but another one is that they needed to descend from the tribe of Levi. Only one priest did not have to, which is Melchizedek, who also served the Most High God, which is Yahweh. Apparently not only Abraham believed in Yahweh, which makes sense of course, since there was a whole lineage from Sem, the son of Noah, where some followed God. Perhaps also Abraham's father was a believer, but only temporarily. This is shown by #todo/nogaftemaken  halve maan, en dan halverwege opgehouden.

v.8. see *MacSBNnkjv* fulfilling righteousness, there was no complete righteousness is Jesus died for all of man, unless He would also have died as man having suffered man's temptations and learned obedience. 
It is like when a rich person pays a fine after having committed a crime. No real justice has been done then, for this rich person still does not understand the pain to pay such a high fine. Righteousness will not have been fulfilled then. 


> 11Concerning him we have much to say, and *it is* hard to explain, since you have become dull of hearing. 12For though by this time you ought to be teachers, you have need again for someone to teach you the elementary principles of the oracles of God, and you have come to need milk and not solid food. 13For everyone who partakes *only* of milk is not accustomed to the word of ::righteousness::, for he is an infant. 14But solid food is for the mature, who because of practice have their senses trained to ::discern:: both good and evil.  

All of a sudden the author changes from a praise of Jesus and His substitution of the old covenant to a reprimanding of his audience. Note that these five chapters comprise only a *little* of what the author wanted to say. This would be—I assume—understandable for those who **partake only of milk**. I am not sure then whether the other chapters are also meant for those of this level or for those who are more mature. 
This of course surprises me, because I have trouble understanding everything in these chapters. Have I then partaken only in milk? If I compare myself with this author, then yes of course. I do not have the insight that he has obtained from the apostles. Every question I have about the Bible or about any doctrine perhaps was already answered to him. 
Also, considering the fact that I am thirty-nine years old and only at this level, what have I not been doing all these years to get to a higher level? I am the one this author is speaking to. **For though by this time [I] ought to be [teacher, I] have need again for someone to teach [me] the elementary principles of the oracles of God**.
It is good to humble myself, even though it hurts my pride. 

Does the emphasis in v.13 lie on righteousness or on the word? This verse could mean that those who are not mature Christians are not accustomed to the Bible, or it could mean that these immature Christians are not used to righteousness.
I have known Christians who regularly bought cheap, inorganic meat and cheap clothes. The meat was produced by farmers who did not care about the wellbeing of animals. They give them horrible food, inject them preventatively with antibiotics and let the cows live in cages where they hardly have any space to move, let alone walk. This method of farming cows has been introduced to Argentina in recent years, and now the people start complaining about the quality of the meat. Even in the taste of the meat it is noticeable what horror is done to these animals. Where is the righteousness of Christians towards animals and people? 
The word is righteous and obeying it will lead to righteousness in every field of life, in what we buy and eat as well. Those Christians who do not apply this righteousness are not **accustomed to the word of righteousness** and have not had **their senses trained to discern both good and evil**. 
Indeed, I myself am guilty of that as well. Sometimes it is only after research on a certain topic that I discover that I have been guilty. One of the first things I read concerning animal wellbeing was on the lives of geese farmed for *foie gras*. It horrified me and I decided to do something about the wellbeing of animals. I am glad my senses get trained in this, because the crucial thing is this: when we see and know the truth, will we do something about this, or make our senses dull so that we become **dull of hearing**? 

#tags/bible/hebrews
#biblestudy/devotionals/hebrews

