# Hebrews 4 (LSB)
> **The Believer’s Rest**  
> **Heb. 4:1**   Therefore, let us fear, lest, while a promise remains of entering His rest, any one of you may seem to have afallen short of it. **2** For indeed we have had good news proclaimed to us, just as they also; but athe word 1that was heard did not profit those 2who were not united with faith among those who heard.   

The proclaimed word will not always profit those who hear it, but only those who are united with faith. This reaffirms the statement in the previous chapter that it was through unbelief, that is the lack of faith and trust, that the Israelites did not enter into God's rest. 

> **3** For we who have believed enter that rest, just as He has said,   
> 	“aAS I SWORE IN MY WRATH,   
> 	THEY SHALL NOT ENTER MY REST,”   
>   
>  although His works were finished bfrom the foundation of the world. **4** For He has spoken asomewhere in this way concerning the seventh*day*: “bAND GOD cRESTED ON THE SEVENTH DAY FROM ALL HIS WORKS”; **5** and again in this*passage*, “aTHEY SHALL NOT ENTER MY REST.”   

This part asks the question why not all enter God's rest, for God already finished the work after the sixth day. What work then is there still to do? If the work is finished there is rest for everyone, right? The answer is that some **fail to enter because of disobedience**. They keep on working for the Law of Moses while God has already given us His Son. Now the Israelites did not know Jesus Christ, although they might or perhaps even *must* have known about the coming Messiah. Regardless of this, there is a difference between those who trust in the Lord (cf. Isaiah 40:31)  and those who work for their salvation. 
Do we have a contradiction then if Philippians 2:15 says that we need to work out our salvation with fear and trembling? Can we consider this rest as salvation itself? I think these are the same. As an example, if one is nearly drowning and tired of staying afloat, once he is saved or salvaged, he can rest and does not need to put in any effort to stay alive. However, the *work out*-part in Philippians 2:15 would refer to what one does to *work out* one's salvation, not to *establish* it—for it has already been established—but to make use of one's salvation. 

> **6** Therefore, since it remains for some to enter it, and those who formerly had good news proclaimed to them failed to enter because of adisobedience, **7** He again determines a certain day, “TODAY,” saying 1through David after so long a time just aas has been said before,   
> 	“bTODAY IF YOU HEAR HIS VOICE,   
> 	DO NOT HARDEN YOUR HEARTS.”  
>   
> **Heb. 4:8**   For aif 1Joshua had given them rest, He would not have spoken of another day after that. **9** So there remains a Sabbath rest for the people of God. **10** For the one who has entered His rest has himself also arested from his works, as bGod did from His.   

The Sabbath rest does not imply that no work is to be done at all, but we follow the example of Jesus, who traveled, ate and healed the sick and probably spread the Gospel as well. All of this was done for the glory of God. The Sabbath is a special day meant to honor God. We must do no work (Exodus 20)—for ourselves, that is—but working for God is allowed, because that is not the work that is meant here. For if honoring God is work, then it is also work to honor your parents by caring for them, and it is work when you buy or pick flowers for your beloved one, or when you cook your family their favorite meal. 
Would it be work then if one spends his Sabbath painting? It would be recreation for one, but for the painter who does this for a living, it would be work. In the same way cooking and doing exercise are not work for those who do it recreationally and occassionally. The Sabbath is to praise God for Who He is, and He is good and generous and from His goodness He has given us so many things we can enjoy. So it is also a day where we can give thanks for His gifts, and use these gifts to honor Him even more, by helping others.

> **11** Therefore let us be diligent to enter that rest, lest anyone fall into the same aexample of bdisobedience. **12** For athe word of God is bliving and cactive and sharper than any two-edged dsword, and piercing as far as the division of esoul and fspirit, of both joints and marrow, and gable to judge the thoughts and intentions of the heart. **13** And athere is no creature hidden from His sight, but all things are 1buncovered and laid bare to the eyes of Him to whom we have an account*to give*.  

Even after we have been saved **diligence** is still needed, even to enter this rest. It costs us, man, something to *stay* at rest. It just like having to tell a child to sit still or to go to bed. It does not want to do either of those but has a tendency to only do what it wants itself. 
Why then should we do this? The answer is clearly written in v.12: **The word of God is living and active and sharper than any two-edged sword.** If we have no fear for the Word of God we will die, not only physically, but spiritually as well. The ones who do not see this sword walk to God or walk with God as if it is completely safe. But just like with any soldier's weapons, these are able to injure not only the enemy but oneself as well. 
For this same reason it says in 2 Timothy 2:15 again that we need to be *diligent* but also that we need to *rightly handle the word of truth*. And Jesus also said #todo/opzoeken/reference that whoever wields the sword (or lives by the sword) will die by the sword. Of course Jesus was referring to a life of violence there, but the principle is the same as the saying concerning sowing and reaping, namely that those who handle the Word of God will have the Law of Christ applied to themself. 
But the Word of God goes even further, it **[pierces] as far as the division of soul and spirit [...] able to judge the thoughts and intentions of the heart**. Those who live by the Word will have all of their thoughts and intentions exposed. A Christian does not live in the dark and does not shut his mouth. He has an intricate, supernatural desire to proclaim Jesus Christ as Lord and as the Mightiest King of the universe. He cannot stay silent when there is another person boasting about his god, like Goliath did and the messenger of Sennacherib—and they did more than just that—for in doing so he insults our God and no Christian will let "heathen dogs" like these #todo/opzoeken word that David used, treat our God this way without retribution. 
This dog could even be us ourselves, our old selves. #todo/nogaftemaken 

Not only the sword that is wielded is almighty strong, but the eyes of those who wield it pierce through anything, even through the hardest heart. The sword is **able to judge the thoughts and intentions of the heart**, while **all things are uncovered and laid bare to the eyes of Him to whom we have an account to give**. 
Sometimes the **two-edged**-characteristic of the sword is used as an example to symbolize the fact that this sword can cut through the flesh and the spirit, or that it cuts another but at the same time it has one sharp edge pointing at yourself. This is not the right exegesis, in my view, although hermeneutically it would not be wrong to mention this as an *application* of the text. The author probably just referred to a type of sword in those days which was sharper than other swords. These days we would use terms such as a razor blade or a surgical scalpel as a simile #todo/opzoeken/engels to indicate the sharpness of something. 
Now it is God Who will apply this sword to everything He sees—and He sees everything—and those who want to walk with God, He will definitely see. So it is irrational to be disobedient or to hide behind another god because God sees everything and cuts through everything. 

> **Jesus Our Great High Priest**  
> **Heb. 4:14**   Therefore, since we have a great ahigh priest who has bpassed through the heavens, Jesus cthe Son of God, let us take hold of our dconfession. **15** For we do not have aa high priest who cannot sympathize with our weaknesses, but One who has been btempted in all things like *we are, yet*cwithout sin. **16** Therefore let us adraw near with bconfidence to the throne of grace, so that we may receive mercy and find grace to help in time of need.  

Which confession is meant here? This could refer to the supremacy of Christ and His superiority over the angels, but it could also refer to the confession that the Christ is the Son of God, or to the confession of hope in Hebrews 10:23 or to a general confession of sins. All four need to be confessed, of course, but in this case the reference to the **high priest who [can] sympathize with our weaknesses** point to the last possibility. For because we have such an empathizing high priest, we *should* confess our sins. We have no reason not to do so. For this reason v.16 calls on us to **draw near with confidence to the throne of grace, so that we may receive mercy and find grace**, for we need God's mercy and grace for the multitude of sins we have committed. 

#biblestudy/devotionals/hebrews #tags/bible/hebrews
