# Hebrews 9 (LSB) 
**The Old Covenant**
> 1Now even the first *covenant* had requirements of divine worship and the earthly sanctuary. 2For there was a tabernacle prepared: the first part, in which *were* the lampstand and the table and the sacred bread, which is called the holy place. 3And behind the second veil there was a tabernacle which is called the Holy of Holies, 4having a golden altar of incense and the ark of the covenant covered on all sides with gold, in which was a golden jar holding the manna, and Aaron’s rod which budded, and the tablets of the covenant. 5And above it *were* the cherubim of glory overshadowing the mercy seat. Of these things we cannot now speak in detail.  
> 6Now when these things have been so prepared, the priests are continually entering the first part *of the* tabernacle performing the divine worship,   

The best and most beautiful part of the tabernacle, was also the most precious one, where everything was made of gold #todo/opzoeken  which part contained silver? yet this part was only entered **once a year**. It speaks of how the best has not even appeared to the world yet and we only see glimpses of this once in a while.
I remember when Google came out with their own e-mail server/provider #todo/opzoeken , Gmail, only a handful of people in the world had access to this product. Google was a bit smaller than it was now and wanted to try out the popularity of its product, and so each person with access to Gmail could invite only fifteen friends to join it. It was the first e-mail provider to come with one or two gigabytes of free storage. 
Google wanted to reach the whole world, but it did not have the capacity for that yet, but also, a lot of people would not accept the invitation and even if they did so, they probably only created a *name* for themselves and never used the benefits of this account. 
This example in itself has so many similarities with this passage in Hebrews and with the life of "Christians". Google was *limited* by its resources and therefore spread Gmail slowly, God is withholding the world from entering the Holy Places right now, but not because He is limited, but because it is not the time yet. Perhaps the measure is not full yet #todo/opzoeken/reference , just like when God did not allow the Israelites to leave Egypt, because His measure with the Ammonites was not full yet. In the same way we know that when Christ comes the elect will be saved, but at the same time the rest will be doomed, which will be many more people than the elect. God is giving them time right now. He is providing the opportunity to repent, to change their ways and to influence others with their ways, more specifically the Way of Christ.
The second part of the example where people create a GMail-address and never use it, sometimes is only to make use of these gigabytes. We are talking about the year 2002 where I once bought a USB-stick with 80 MBs on it for 80 euros (Footnote: Compare this to portable storage media such as SD-cards which could contain 100 GBs or more for the same price.). People used their GMail-account as a way of storage, by mailing themselves attachments. 
Another example, and perhaps, the most striking one is that they created a GMail-account without actually using it for what it was meant, sending mail. Today we see people tagging the name of Christ on themselves and they call themselves "Christian". Supposedly they get to profit from the infinite amount of grace that God provided through His Son, but they do not do what they are called for. Christ's followers are called "Christians" because they resemble Christ. Christ was not enjoying the grace of the Father, but rather giving gratiously to others. He spent His time with others and gave and exercised His gifts to others, never charging anyone anything. And just like mails are meant to be sent with messages in it, Christians are meant to be sent out, spreading the message to everyone. 
The word "mission" comes from Latin and means "to be sent out". Our mission is—literally—to be sent out. And we have been sealed, just like letters are sealed, to indicate our #todo/opzoeken/engels afkomst heritage?, namely that we are from the Holy Spirit and the Father is our sender, but also to show that this letter is meant specifically for each receiver. And each receiver must break this seal before he can receive the message. 
This is what it costs us, for we have this seal (cf. Ephesians 1:13) and each time we give our message to others, to those for whom it is meant, our seal breaks. It is a battle each time with the evil one when we spread the Gospel to an unbeliever and we are open to attacks from the unbeliever and the devil. The seal will heal itself, because it is the Holy Spirit Who will remind us of God's promises. But we are attacked in our faith and in our own obedience to God. 
**Example.** I wanted to spread the Gospel to a Muslim, but instead I had an argument with him who tried to convince me that the Bible was wrong. There were difficult questions concerning why Jesus would let Himself be crucified by His own creation and why Jesus claimed to be God and yet did not know everything. To some of those questions I had to think very carefully. To some of those questions I thought that there was no straight answer, such as that Jesus in His incarnate form was God, but had the possibility to voluntarily put down His omniscience. 
But the Holy Spirit will heal this seal and whatever that has been broken. It was needed to bring across the message to the unbeliever, but at the same time, this unbeliever is convicted by not believing the message given to him. 

**Update.** After reading Hebrews 10 I realized the author meant that it is indeed possible now for Christian to enter the Holy of Holies through Jesus' blood. 
#todo/nogaftemaken  just like Christians only wear the name of being a Christian, but never use it. 
GMail account vs. Google account, 
Gmail is only one product of the whole Google Family, voorbeelden 
wearing the Name of Jesus Christ does not give one anything, but entering the covenant and standing on God's promises , will show you the kingdom of God. #todo/nogaftemaken #church/material/sermon

> 7but into the second, only the high priest *enters* once a year, not without *taking* blood, which he offers for himself and for the sins of the people committed in ignorance.   

This is another summation of why Christ is better than any Levitical priest and why everything of Christ is better than any ritual of the old covenant. 
* **The high priest enters once a year** to offer to God and to pray for the people, but Jesus shed His blood and offered it only once.
* The high priest enters once a year to pray for the people, but Jesus prays continually for us (cf. John 15, although it is not sure if Jesus still prays for us while he is in heaven). 
* The high priest offers for himself, but Jesus does not need to do that and the full offer is for the people.

> 8The Holy Spirit *is* indicating this, that the way into the holy places has not yet been manifested while that first part *of the* tabernacle is still standing, 9which *is* a symbol for the present time. Accordingly both gifts and sacrifices are offered which cannot make the worshiper perfect in conscience, 10since they *relate* only to food and drink and various washings, requirements for the body imposed until a time of reformation.  

The symbolism of the Tabernacle goes very far. (Footnote: There is even a theory about this, which I have not heard of (#todo/opzoeken Tabernakel leer)). Here, however, a study is not needed, for the explanation has been given and it is the **Holy Spirit Who is indicating this.**The first and second part of the Tabernacle, being the Holy and the Holy of Holies, indicate the present and future time. Currently we cannot meet God yet, even though we have the Holy Spirit and though we have been cleansed (John 15).

There is a certain moment for certain persons who can enter the Holy of Holies, perhaps these are the dead, who have been glorified, or select chosen ones such as Moses, who saw God while he was alive.
The offering that took place in the temple was only a temporary propitiation, for the people needed to offer again and again for their sins. In the same way, we need to repeatedly ask for forgiveness, but not because the offer was not great enough–for the offer of Jesus Christ is grander than any other–nor is it because the One Who offers these has been defiled and has defiled the offer–for it is Jesus Christ Himself Who offers Himself, being the High Priest and the offer at the same time–but we keep on sinning in our flesh which is still connected to our soul.
And it is not God Who has not forgiven us yet, for His promises are satisfactory and sufficient, and they are true (cf. Hebrews 6:18). The promises of amongst others Hosea and Ezekiel have not been fully fulfilled yet, but they will be and until that time we may enter the Holy, which is an honor in itself!

The offers cannot make man **perfect in conscience**—as we currently are not—it is only when we enter the Holy of Holies that our body, soul and mind, and therefore our conscience as well, will be perfect. It is not because the offers are not good enough, neither the sacrificial animals nor the offer of Jesus at the cross. It is because these **gifts and sacrifices [...] relate only to food and drink and various washings**. Jesus' offer was not meant to make our conscience perfect. It is like someone giving a bar of priceless pure gold to a doctor and the doctor still says he cannot heal the patient. Is the bar not good enough then? No, the bar has a different purpose, it is meant for payment. In the same way Jesus' offer was a symbol—albeit very real—for the payment that was on us, the very punishment that we deserved has now come upon Jesus. (Footnote: If this punishment for every person was on Jesus, and this punishment was on the unsaved as well by means of the torment suffered in hell, then this would mean the a punishment was given twice and Jesus suffered this punishment for nothing. This is, of course, mere human logic, but according to this logic we must conclude that if God is efficient and all-knowing He would not let His Son suffer for nothing, since He already knows Who will be saved in the future, and hence let His Son suffer only for those who will be saved. This does not diminish the free will of man, but it does set the basis for the doctrine of limited atonement #biblestudy/theology/calvinism/limitedatonement. Note, however, that I am mentioning this in a specific order. I am not saying that God decided first of all to limit the atonement of Jesus and *therefore* only a limited number of people could be saved.)

All these requirements were **imposed** on the Israelites. It is not that this is a bad thing per se, but it does show man's brokenness. In a perfect marriage the husband does not need to show how he loves his wife, for everything he does will be done out of love. But because none are perfect, there are *imposed* ways—if you will—to show love and ways to compensate for love not given. 
**Example.** Coincidentally my wife mentioned something about this concerning her experience with our previous church. The often did not *feel* lose towards her. People hardly gave her gifts, or better said, most people did *not* give any gifts, did *not* invite her for dinner or showed any initiative on their side, while my wife is exactly the opposite. She then said that perhaps others show their love by praying for her, and while that may be true, it is not something that she *knows* or feels.

In the same way, man is not perfect and so in the covenant between God and Abraham burn offers #todo/opzoeken/engels and wave offers, which are also called ... (sacrificial?) and gift offers are imposed.

> **The New Covenant**  
> 11But when Christ appeared *as* a high priest of the good things to come, *He entered* through the greater and more perfect tabernacle, not made with hands, that is to say, not of this creation, 12and not through the blood of goats and calves, but through His own blood, He entered the ::holy places:: once for all, having obtained eternal redemption. 13For if the blood of goats and bulls and the ashes of a ::heifer:: sprinkling those who have been defiled sanctify for the cleansing of the flesh, 14::how much more:: will the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered Himself without blemish to God, cleanse your conscience from dead works to serve the living God?  

What is the logic behind Jesus' blood being worth more than that of goats and bulls? #biblestudy/questions

> 15And for this reason He is the mediator of a new covenant, so that, since a death has taken place for the redemption of the trespasses that were *committed* under the first covenant, those who have been called may receive the promise of the eternal inheritance. 16For where a covenant is, there must of necessity be the death of the one who made it. 17For a covenant is valid *only* when men are ::dead::, for it is never in force while the one who made it lives.  

The explanation in v.18ff explains that the blood needed was provided by the animals, but still not *why* it is needed. Moreover, it does not explain how the maker of it had died. God made it, He did not die, so does that mean then that the first covenant never was in force? v.17 said that a **a covenant is valid only when men are dead**, so this applies only to men or mankind. In the case of God this can of course be valid at other times because God never dies. Still, the question remains, *why* is this necessary? A will or testament is in force after one is dead, and before one's dead, one can change this as many times as one pleases. But a covenant such as the one God made with Abraham was a promise that God would take of Abraham's progeny if they were obedient. In this case it was a progeny concerning Abraham's great-grandchildren. In the case of the second covenant it was a promise concerning what happens with them when they die (and go to heaven if they are under this covenant). 

> 18Therefore not even the first *covenant* was inaugurated without blood. 19For when every commandment had been spoken by Moses to all the people according to the Law, he took the blood of the calves and the goats, with water and scarlet wool and hyssop, and sprinkled both the book itself and all the people, 20saying, “This is the blood of the covenant which God commanded you.” 21And in the same way, both the tabernacle and all the vessels of the ministry he sprinkled with the blood. 22And according to the Law, *one may* almost *say*, all things are cleansed with blood, and without shedding of blood there is no forgiveness.  

There is a difference between forgiveness and penance. There is also a difference between forgiveness and trust and reconciliation. All are needed in order to restore a relation, but the first step that needs to be taken is forgiveness. Forgiveness is what is needed to *let go* of the hurt. Without this step all other steps and actions will be influenced by and connected with oneself. For example, without forgiveness, *penance* will hurt not only the perpetrator, but also the victim. *The First Wives Club* is a movie #tags/movies about four wives of rich husbands who all have been abandoned by their husbands for a younger woman and come together to seek revenge. Though this movie is a comedy the reality is that the husbands' misdemeanor hurt their wives and the latter were hurt all the time while they were planning and carrying out their revenge. Even after they successfully carried this out, it seems like all were happy and peaceful with their newly gained freedom, independence and wealth, but the hurt of being rejected by their husband of at least twenty years would still be present in normal situations. They *only* way of getting rid of the hurt is through forgiveness which means "letting go of the hurt in order that another person's joy or pain will not influence your joy". 
The second and third steps are those of *trust* and *reconciliation*. Trust *must* happen *before* reconciliation. It is possible to interchange these two steps, but it would not be wise. A wife who has been beaten by her drunk husband for example can choose to reconcile with him, but if she does not trust him, she will still live in fear of his old habits showing up again. If, however, he has shown to have changed and *gains* her trust, they can be ready to reconcile again. 
The fourth step is penance. The perpetrator must pay for his deeds. In the case of a wife-beater he must go to jail. In the case of a son who breaks his father's window, he needs to pay back. Penance needs to be done #todo/opzoeken/engels , but in the latter case the window may be paid by someone else who is willing to do so, even the father himself. The penance for a wife-beater is a bit more difficult to propitiate for. 
If my definition of "forgiveness" is correct, I do not understand why v.22 says that blood (which is part of the penance) is needed for forgiveness, because these are two separate parts in the process of restoration of the relationship. 
#biblestudy/questions
#todo/nogaftemaken 

> 23Therefore it was necessary for the copies of the things in the heavens to be cleansed with these, but the heavenly things themselves with better sacrifices than these. 24For Christ did not enter holy places made with hands, *mere* copies of the true ones, but into ::heaven:: itself, now to appear in the presence of God for us;   

Christ **entered through the greater and more perfect tabernacle** (v.11) which is **heaven itself**. In the copy of the heavenly tabernacle—the temple—the high priest went to Most Holy place *near* the presence of God. It was not as if God resided *in* the Ark of the Covenant—because God is everywhere—but symbolically this is the place where God's presence could be felt most intensely. Jesus Christ entered heaven itself and there is no most holy place in heaven—I think—because God is all-present there. Jesus also did not get *near* God, but He went to God as near as possible. Jesus also does not do this one a year, but does this every day and all the time! 

> 25nor was it that He would offer Himself often, as the high priest enters the holy places year by year with blood that is not his own. 26Otherwise, He would have needed to suffer often since the foundation of the world; but now once at the ::consummation:: of the ages He has been ::manifested:: to put away sin by the sacrifice of Himself.   

Manifested -> See 1 John 1. When this was, was when Jesus was born. 
What is this consummation of the ages? #biblestudy/questions

> 27And inasmuch as it is appointed for men to die once and after this *comes* judgment, 28so Christ also, having been offered once to bear the sins of many, will appear a second time for ::salvation without *reference to* sin::, to those who eagerly await Him.  

#biblestudy/questions God **appointed for men to die once and [having] after this [...] judgment**. Why did God not appoint men to die twice, being able to regret the sins they have committed in their life, start a new life—such as Buddhists can have an almost infinite number of times—and then fall under the judgment? Some would find it more fair if people had two lives. Some would find it fair if people could live lives longer than 80 years. But we should not forget that people used to live hundreds of years in the beginning—at one point even up to 800 plus years—and still not regret their sins.
What is more important, however, is that Christ bore the sins of many only **once**. His single act of righteousness was sufficient for the "justification of life to all men" (cf. Romans 5:18). Man is modeled *after* Christ and in the same is the righteousness for man modeled according to God's righteousness. Jesus Christ died only once, and for this reason man needs to die only once and await one judgment or to receive only one gift of grace. 

#biblestudy/devotionals/hebrews