# Hebrews 6 (LSB)
See also sermon on this topic on 20230507

### Warning Against Falling Away
**Heb. 6:1**   Therefore aleaving bthe 1elementary teaching about the 2Christ, let us press on to 3cmaturity, not laying again ::a foundation of repentance from ddead works and of faith toward God::, **2** of ateaching about washings and blaying on of hands, and the cresurrection of the dead and deternal judgment. **3** And this we will do, aif God permits. **4** For in the case of those once having been aenlightened and having tasted of bthe heavenly gift and having become cpartakers of the Holy Spirit, **5** and having atasted the good bword of God and the powers of cthe age to come, **6** and having fallen away, it is aimpossible to renew them again to repentance, 1bsince they again crucify to themselves the Son of God and put Him to open shame. **7** For ground that drinks the rain which often 1falls on it and brings forth vegetation useful to those afor whose sake it is also tilled, receives a blessing from God; **8** but if it yields thorns and thistles, it is unfit and aclose 1to being cursed, and its end is to be burned.

Without going too deep on these—unfortunately—perhaps *infamous* verses on the possibility of losing one's salvation #biblestudy/theology/calvinism/osas#—I am saying *unfortunately* here because no part of the Bible should be infamous, cause strife between parties or cause any schism at all between people—we can first take a look at what the author meant with the whole paragraph. The author speaks in the first person plural **we** in v.3 and explains that they will only explain these foundational doctrines **again [...] if God permits**. Why would God not permit this? v.4ff give the answer. Since it **impossible to renew [those who have fallen away] again to repentance** it would be of no use to explain even the Gospel to them.
Note that it is not new unbelievers who are meant here, for they still need to hear the Gospel. Of course, if an unbeliever were not elected, we would not have to spread the Gospel to him, for that very same reason. But the fact is that we never know God's plans. God has hardened hearts of kings and pharaohs (see the pharaoh #todo/opzoeken naam in Moses' time and the many kings in 1 Kings, 2 Kings) letting them pave their own road to hell, but at the same time has broken and changed hearts of the most cruel peoples and world rulers (e.g. the people of Nineveh in the book of Jonah, Nebuchadnezzar and Cyrus). For us, however, looking back, we know that people such as Hitler, Mao and Stalin #tags/famouspeople, did not give their life to Jesus Christ. If we were sent back in time, we should thus not even tell the Gospel to them, lest we waste our time. In the same way Jesus did not tell Herod, Pilate and the Pharisees (Footnote. Jesus did say something about His divinity to the Pharisees, but it was in a different way than He did to others who *were* open to the Gospel. Also, when Jesus did so, He did it so that those standing around the Pharisees, who were watching and listening would hear and come to faith—not for the Pharisees per se. #todo/opzoeken/reference) about the Son of Man and that they should repent and believe, because Jesus already knew they would not accept Him.
Who are meant here are those who have had a substantial experience of the life of a faithful Christian, it is those who **once having been enlightened, and having tasted of the heavenly gift and having become partakers of the Holy Spirit, 5 and having tasted the good word of God and the powers of the age to come**. They have experienced much more than most Christians even get to experience before they come to faith.  ... #todo/nogaftemaken  
They have not only the knowledge but also the experience of Christians, even the *spiritual experience*, and tasted the power of God. Now the latter could mean that they have seen miracles or that they had even performed these themselves, but either way, they did not repent and give themselves over to Christ. 

I will not go into the doctrine of Once Saved, Always Saved #biblestudy/theology/calvinism/osas right now, but I will assume this doctrine is correct. I therefore will not write that people have "fallen from the faith" but "fallen away", which means that people have gotten very close to the faith, like Judas even or Thomas, but have not had it completely nor have they surrendered all of their life.

Now what would it mean to **again crucify to themselves the Son of God and put Him to open shame**? I have heard an interpretation before that those who "repent again" after they have fallen *would* crucify Jesus again. But v.6 clearly speaks in the present tense—not in the future tense—as if they are doing this right now. Also, it says that they crucify Jesus *to themselves*, what would that mean? 
Those who knowingly reject Jesus are at present crucifying Jesus again and putting Him to open shame. Each time when people like Bart Ehrman and Michael #todo/opzoeken #tags/famouspeople/critics say they used to be "newborn Christians" they are putting Christ to shame, for they are claiming that Christ's sacrifice is not worthy enough to even *stay* Christian and that it does not even provide sufficient faith in them to believe this ever happened. 
It would be like a father who has given his son everything he needed in order to have his career. The father paid with his blood, sweat and tears so that the son could go to college and gave him everything he needed. But each time the son tells about his achievements, he neglects or does not even acknowledge his father's involvement in it. Each time he does that, he is putting his father to shame. Even if he is not saying anything negative about his father, it will first of all seem that the father did not even do anything to help his son, but second of all, the father is worthy of that praise. So the son is not giving him what is due him.
Still, however, that would only be the part on *shame*; The son would not *crucify* his father here. To explore this further we need to understand what the crucifixion means. Symbolically, the crucifixion concerns Jesus as the cursed person, receiving the punishment meant for another person.  The cross is, first and most important of all, the thing upholding the suffering of a person. The person cannot get off, because it is fixed to the cross by nails. The cross does not relent when one is tired. It is not soft nor smooth for the bruised, cut and sun-burnt bare skin. Whoever is fixed to it, suffers emotionally and physically for as long as the cross stands. During the day hoardes of people will see the victims, both strangers and acquaintances, to mock them or pity them—and all the while the victim does not have enough strength to fight back with them, nor does it have the position. The victim can easily be mocked by the people, because they know he will not do anything back, and all he can say is between heavy breaths that cost him much energy, for which he will be mocked even more. And this position brings out the worst in people. 
**Example.** #todo/opzoeken  Yale Prison Experiment or electric current punishment
#todo/nogaftemaken 
In the night he is helplessly alone. Jesus never hung at the cross in the night, but would possibly at least have His followers and family watching Him. I am not sure if the angels would be around Him, because even God had left Him. (Footnote: I am not sure even God had left Him around the time that Jesus said this or hours before that when the crucifixion started.) Other victims, however—I would imagine—would have been left by the family and friends. The cross was not a punishment #todo/opzoeken/engels uitgevoerd for small crimes. It was for people like Barabbas who were murderers and possibly had left all their community.

The cross was a method to let convicts suffer physically. During the day the heat of the sun gets just enough fluid to drink—and not water but vinegar—the skin is scorched and no part except one's back is slightly protected from the sun. During the night it gets to very low temperatures, and high up, without any protection, without any strength left, it is unimaginably cold. Furthermore, it put strain on the breathing of those who hung there, because the ribcage was pressed down. 

The cross was meant for emotional damage as well. It is shaped in such a way that the person's body is spread out, shamelessly—as convicts were crucified naked, not even with loin cloths as shown in paintings of Jesus' crucifixion—on a high hill and on a big cross, so that everyone around it, even in the city, could see them. In the movie #tags/movies *Spartacus*, the eponymous protagonist played by Kirk Douglas #tags/famouspeople/actors and his accomplices were crucified at the side of an important road for the very same reason that as many people as possible would see the crucified and be discouraged to commit crimes. 

Putting these facts together, the cross is that thing to which one is crucified which is shames one, makes him suffer and eventually kills him. So in other words, when v.7 says that **they again crucify to themselves the Son of God** it means that they are the cross *themselves*. They are the ones shaming Jesus and upholding the pain and suffering. This verse, once again, is written in the *present* tense—these people are crucifying Him *right now*. For those who are murdering or persecuting Him (cf. Acts 9:5) there is no salvation until they first stop doing so. And some have stopped, for a while, to taste **of the heavenly gift** and all the other things mentioned, but have now crucified Him to themselves **again**. 
Even the Pharisees and the Scribes and priests who killed Him could be saved, if only they repented, but one who has done this—who comes to an understanding of the Gospel and then kills Him *again*—for such a person it is **impossible to [be renewed] again to repentance.** And in this case it does not matter whether the person who partook of the Holy Spirit has actually been reborn or not, the above conclusion applies for both proponents and opponents of the doctrine of *Once Saved, Always Saved*, and it confirms that true repentance can only come once. 

### The Inheritance of the Promises
**Heb. 6:9**   But we are convinced about you, abeloved, of things that are better and that belong to salvation, though we are speaking in this way. **10** For aGod is not unrighteous so as to forget byour work and the love which you have shown toward His name, in having cministered and continuing to minister to the 1saints. **11** And we desire that each one of you show the ::same:: diligence 1so as to ::realize:: the afull assurance of bhope until the end, **12** so that you may not become dull, but aimitators of those who through bfaith and patience cinherit the promises.

How does one **realize the full assurance of hope**—through **diligence**? And what would the author have meant by "the **same** diligence"? Note first of all that one does not realize full assurance through diligence, for it is only the Holy Spirit Who gives assurance, not works. 
Note that it does not say "the same diligence as ours". Would he then mean the same diligence as *each other*, just like when one would say "I want you all to look the same way"? This would not mean much if all were equally not-diligent at all, but of course we need to take v.12 into account as well. This time we can fill it in with "the same diligence *as the authors* have."
Then one question remains, and that is how this is realized. Can we really say that through diligence, that is hard work, one can or will have more assurance? No, but one *can* say that this will help realizing this **until the end**. The assurance of hope comes through the Holy Spirit, but we need to answer Him and we show this through our diligence. If any lack in their diligence—as any reader knows that some in his surrounding have—their burning heart for the Gospel of Christ will smolder as well until it is fully extinguished. It is not God who puts this out, for He wants to make it burning again (cf. Isaiah 42:3) but it is the person himself who does not attend to his fire anymore and has **become dull**. Now this promise of salvation is by the grace of God and is not obtained through work, but through faith (cf. Ephesians 2:8-9), but these people lack in **faith and patience** and instead of waiting to **inherit the promises** they have worked in order to obtain it. Waiting is *harder* than working!  

**Heb. 6:13**   For awhen God made the promise to Abraham, since He could swear by no one greater, He bswore by Himself, **14** saying, “aI WILL GREATLY BLESS YOU AND I WILL GREATLY MULTIPLY YOU.” **15** And so, ahaving patiently waited, he obtained the promise. **16** aFor men swear by 1one greater*than themselves*, and with them ban oath*given* as confirmation is an end of every dispute. **17** 1In the same way God, desiring even more to show to athe heirs of the promise bthe unchangeableness of His purpose, guaranteed*it* with an oath, **18** so that by ::two:: unchangeable things in which ait is impossible for God to lie, we who have 1taken refuge would have strong encouragement to take hold of bthe hope set before us. **19** 1This ahope we have as an anchor of the soul, a *hope* both sure and confirmed and one which benters 2within the veil, **20** awhere a forerunner has entered for us—Jesus, having become a bhigh priest forever according to the order of Melchizedek.

An oath means that one promises to say the truth and calls upon a witness. Swearing is the act of making this promise under oath. So these are not two separate things. If man were always to speak the truth then a simple promise would suffice, without any witnesses needed. Unfortunately man does not always believe each other, and so this oath is needed to make **end [to] every dispute**. People would also not simply believe God, and therefore He not only promises but **swore by Himself**. This oath is not seen in v.14 but in the verse before the original text which it is quoted from, we do see it (Genesis 22:16-17). 
The **two unchangeable things** mentioned here are God's **unchangeableness of His purpose** and His **oath**. He cannot lie about His purpose, because God was and is and will always be the same #todo/opzoeken/reference and now that He sworn by it, He shows this **even more**, even though this is not needed. But He does all that so that we **take hold of the hope**.
This hope is **set before us**, but if we do not take hold of it, we do not have the assurance mentioned in v.11. Hope could be in many places. It could be in the Bible laying before one on the table, it could be in calling a person who could tell you about the hope of the Gospel. But if one does not pick up this Bible or calls this person, he will not have this hope. These are examples and analogies of physical actions to obtain this hope, but spiritually there are actions to take hold of this hope as well. For whenever we come into a situation where we lose hope, we need to ask ourselves the question whether we still believe God's purpose is unchangeable. 
Personally this is what lets me take hold of the hope at all times. I know God's purpose is unchangeable and His will will *always* be done. And therefore I know that whatever happens to me will always occur *under* God's purpose and it will be *good*. This is what I long for, that whatever happens, either to me or to anyone else, will be good. 

#tags/bible/hebrews
#biblestudy/devotionals/hebrews