# 2 John (ESV)
***Greeting***
*1 The elder to the elect lady and her children, whom I love in truth, and not only I, but also all who know the truth, 2 because of the truth that abides in us and will be with us forever:*
*3 Grace, mercy, and peace will be with us, from God the Father and from Jesus Christ the Father's Son, in truth and love.*

***Walking in Truth and Love***
*4 I rejoiced greatly to find some of your children walking in the truth, just as we were commanded by the Father. 5 And now I ask you, dear lady—not as though I were writing you a new commandment, but the one we have had from the beginning—that we love one another.*

Why would John remind this lady to keep the greatest commandment, if some of her children were already **walking in the truth**? If there were only **some**, would it not be more logical to remind her to instruct her children (e.g. 2 Timothy 3:16-17 or like "parents instruct your children" #todo/opzoeken/reference something like Deuteronomy 6, or Proverbs)? Perhaps John is implying here that in order to reach out to those who have not converted yet, we should use love. More than that, though, John wants to emphasize what this love then is, which is to **walk according to his commandments**. 
An additional explanation of this verse is that *some* of her children might be **walking in the truth**, but what is this truth then? It is to walk according to the commandments of the Bible. So they might have heard the truth and want to live according to it, but they do not know how to do this just yet. 
It is just like the previous Chinese church I attended. Many of them claim to be Christians—and perhaps they are—and sometimes they seek God through His Word, but many do not walk according to His commandments. They might try to do that, by not lying for example or keeping any of the other commandments in the Bible, but what is not commanded explicitly in the Bible is the use of money (materialism), time (leisure through movies and gaming), the amount of time one needs to spend and frequency to read and memorize the Bible. That is the *complete* walk that needs to be done. 
Of course, it is not possible to be walking in the truth and *not* be walking according to His commandments, but it is possible that one does not *know* how what these commandments are. And so my previous church might a potential addressee of this letter—some are doing well, but even they can do better. 

*6 And this is love, that we walk according to his commandments; this is the commandment, just as you have heard from the beginning, so that you should ::walk:: in it.*

This verse has a striking similarity with Ephesians 2:10, which is not surprising, given that John and Paul have the same divine inspiration. We have been *created* for good works, and we have **heard from the beginning** that we **should walk in it**. This is the only purpose for which God created us. 
Now if God wanted to have creatures with the sole purpose of obedience of His commandments, could he not have been satisfied with robots, animals or angels? The first two could never obey any commandment of God. Both of them are incapable of sinning and do not have any higher capacity of thinking or feeling. I do not know about the angels, but there must be some they do not have, which we as humans do have, which most likely lies in the field of the relationship with God and with sinning. 
We know that angels are capable of sinning, but on the other hand there is a common understanding between Christians that the angels that are in heaven now will never sin anymore, which is something that cannot be said of humans, even after their conversion and salvation. On the other hand, truly newborn Christians (which actually is a #todo/opzoeken redundant, literary term for that?) will never sin in heaven, but angels *were* able to sin, as the Satan has shown. 
So God created us for a different reason, for something even the angels cannot do or have. The angels can worship God and they can sin, so in that sense they seem very much like us, but they are servants and not children of God. This is perhaps also why God created this authoritarian relationship between masters and servants and between fathers (or parents) and children (cf. Colossians 3 #todo/opzoeken/reference last verses, but there are many other verses on this), where the father is the master (and the spouse) as well. So according to these analogies God is the father and we are His children, God is the master and the angels (yet we too) are His servants, and God (the Son) is the husband and we (the Church) are His wife. We can take all three positions and perhaps the angels can have a relationship with God as well, but it would not be the same as we have. 

*7 For many deceivers have gone out into the world, those who do not confess the coming of Jesus Christ in the flesh. Such a one is the deceiver and the antichrist.*

Here we have another "**for**" which Paul uses to refer to one of his previous sentences. This verse could explain the reason why he asks the lady to love one another (v.5) or that we should walk in God's commandments (v.6). Since the latter implies the former we do not have a difficulty explaining this *for*. This verse then means that many deceivers *will come*—but have *already* *gone out into the world*—but in order to withstand and distinguish these deceivers from the rest of the world, we need to *love one another*, which is to follow God's commandments, which are all based on love. 
For it is *love* that these deceivers lack. Any enemy of God lacks the attributes of God and the greatest of these enemies is the antichrist, which is not—within this context, as far as I can interpret here—the final nemesis as in the Book of Revelation, but rather a person who is the opposite of (i.e. *anti*) Christ, which is exactly how he can be recognized, because of his opposite attributes. 
Take for example the Leftwing #tags/politics/left propaganda which promotes all kinds of things that are *like* love, such as allowing everyone to marry (even when they only *think* they love each other, hence the many divorces there are, especially between actors), allowing homosexuals to marry #tags/lgbt, allowing immigrants into the country to have a better life,  affirmative action and providing food stamps for the poor. All of these are superficial love, perhaps giving more joy to the receiver on the short term, but definitely not on the longer term. Real love cares about *making* people's lives *better*, not about making them only *feel* better, otherwise we could just give those people drugs. 
In a sense all of the abovementioned examples are drugs. When immigrants for example come into the United States they will not necessarily have a better life. Just like after using drugs people feel more empty, so immigrants will sometimes have an even harder life than where they were from, because they do not speak the language and cannot find any job, or will only get illegal jobs. In order to overcome this they get food stamps to get by. But then other issues will arise as well, which can only be covered by more of those Leftwing initiatives. Ultimately, when not everything can be solved, they will blame everything on the Right and on racism and white supremacy, claiming that immigrants do not get a chance. 
In other words, the Left clearly shows the attributes of the antichrist and whoever is leading it *is* an antichrist.

Furthermore, the Satan deceives by saying that we do not have to walk in these commandments of God. He lets the world think that it can create its own commandments as long as they are still moral according to their own conscience. Now the Satan knows that he cannot rule out the conscience of people, which is inherent to mankind, but he can slowly alter this with anything they learn and see, which is through education, entertainment (Hollywood and social media) and information (news, but strengthened and emphasized through social media). 

*8 Watch yourselves, so that you may not ::lose:: what we have worked for, but may win a full reward.*

Of course we do not have to worry that we will lose our *salvation* once we have obtained that. The salvation is that which we have been *given*, it is the grace of God and it is nothing **we have worked for** (cf. Ephesians 2:9 #todo/opzoeken/reference ), so this verse is probably referring to something else than our salvation. Next to that there is also the way in which Paul phrases that the *receiver* of this letter **may not lose what** *Paul* has worked for. Paul has worked to bring the receiver—and I would say both believers as well as unbelievers—closer to God. Those who do not believe are brought to the threshold of the kingdom, but need to choose whether to step across it or not, as Josh McDowell #tags/famouspeople/christian noted in his autobiographical novella *Undaunted* #tags/books. For believers it is the #todo/opzoeken/engels toerusting building of the people, the exhortation with which so many Christians are equiped #todo/opzoeken/engels spelling by Paul, which we can all lose. We lose the verses we have memorized for example, but also the skills used in ministry. Paul is, however, referring to much more important things that we lose when we are deceived. I would give as an example #todo/opzoeken that guy who founded the Jehova's Witnesses. He might have had great knowledge of the Bible, good habits in Bible reading, tithing etc. and all the other things we see the Jehova's Witnesses #tags/religion/jehovaswitnesses do, which they all got from their teacher, but he lost the most important thing, and that is the truth. He was on his way of knowing the truth if only he had been more humble and acknowledged the fact that he could not logically understand the being of the Trinity, which no man can. It was for this reason that he founded this sect which explains the beings of and relations between the Holy Spirit, Jesus as "son" of God and the Father, namely with the Holy Spirit as merely a power, not a person, and Jesus as merely an angel and the leader of God's army. 
However, he was one who was clearly not saved and has unfortunately dragged a great many others throughout history along with him.  
For those who are saved, there is a loss of precious time. Those that are true Christians but are in the wrong Bible school or church and have received the wrong teaching, will eventually learn the truth, for I trust the Holy Spirit to let each Christian know of the truth, first concerning crucial matters and later on the less crucial ones—each in his own time. This is how I had spent more than ten years in my previous Chinese church, not having any knowledge about all kinds of doctrines, the Reformation, missionaries and famous preachers, and spent my time watching useless television series, movies and reading manga. I could have learned so much about love, God and the Holy Spirit and anything else that is useful, but I have lost that time. 
Now "time" is not something we have worked for, so Paul is not directly referring to this, 
But it is important to note that whatever we have built up, can get lost: knowledge and skills can get lost when we do not use them, memorized text get lost when we do not rehearse them. Also, when we are working towards a goal, for example of raising our children, and we have worked so hard for that, we can still miss out on this goal when we commit a sinful act, for example having an extramarital affair, abusing a child and overpunishing a child, committing fraud and ending up in jail. These events might emotionally scar a child for life leading it not to become the person you wanted him to be, let alone being led to Christ. So in this example we do not lose the salvation of our child, for they never obtained it, but the good that has been done has (all) been negated, and as a whole we miss the target we worked for. 

*9 Everyone who goes on ahead and does not ::abide:: in the teaching of Christ, does not have God. Whoever abides in the teaching has both the Father and the Son. 10 If anyone comes to you and does ::not:: bring this teaching, do not receive him into your house or give him any greeting, 11 for whoever greets him takes ::part:: in his wicked works.*

The warning to **not receive him into your house** is not only referring to teachers of a false religion, but to anyone who **bring**s this teaching. There is a Christian sect from Chinese called *Eastern Lightning* #tags/religion/cult which tells it people to infiltrate into Christian fellowships, build relationships and then convince them to leave their church and become part of the Eastern Lightning church. A fellow church member of my current church had such as person in his smallgroup who actually tried to do this and bring the false Gospel. Now I am not sure whether she succeeded in this, but she was eventually forced out of the group. 
This warning is to protect one's own house (family), smallgroup and congregation. Some might distinguish between the true and false Gospel, but those who are not spiritually mature and knowledgeable about the differences between the two could either stop following God (if they were not true believers yet) or being hampered in their growth towards God (if they are true believers) and lose any of the aforementioned things in the notes on the previous verses. 
This warning and command, however, does not only apply to those who spiritually immature, it is for everyone. The spiritual mature should not engage in discussions with these people and neither should they break this commandment of Paul by allowing this person in the setting of only the spiritual mature—for who knows what the devil can bring along with this person? So if anyone encounters this, he should not think high of himself, lest he fall (1 Corinthians 10:12), but rather he should flee from this temptation, like Jacob did, and resist the devil (James 4:7).

The next question is why we should not **give [this person] any greeting**? The answer is because we then take **part in his wicked works**. How is this possible then by a simple greeting? A greeting is meant to be friendly. How can a Christian be friendly towards someone who just killed your family is about to kill even more? The person who brings the false gospel to our family members and our children, and to those who do not belong to the family of God yet, is planning to drag them all to hell. Can we greet him friendly and invite him to our house? No, of course not! We need to clearly let this person know that he is not welcome in our house until he changes his ways. 
We cannot convert this person of spread the Gospel to him so that he will convert, but he has had that time. At the beginning, before the Christian knows about his false teaching, the Christian should know about the stances of this false teacher and try to convince him. But if he does not listen, let the Christian wipe off the dust off his feet and continue on his journey (#todo/opzoeken/reference ). 
All of this is to prevent him from getting any foothold in our houses, but to what extent would we take part in his wicked works by a mere greeting? One answer is that we provide an example to others. When others see us greeting this person, they might think they can greet him as well, and when they do, this false teacher might see an entrance to greet them back and get into contact with them, with all kinds of consequences. 
#biblestudy/questions What could be other reasons? 

***Final Greetings***
*12 Though I have much to write to you, I would rather not use paper and ink. Instead I hope to come to you and talk face to face, so that our joy may be complete.*
*13 The children of your elect sister greet you.*

The best way of communication is always **face to face**, even with our current day technology to  see each other through video and now even with zero latency through 5G, this still is not the same as meeting each other in person. This makes one's **joy complete**.

#biblestudy/devotionals/2john


