# 1 Corinthians 5 (ESV) 
***Sexual Immorality Defiles the Church***
*1 It is actually reported that there is sexual immorality among you, and of a kind that is not tolerated even among pagans, for a man has his father's wife. 2 And you are arrogant! Ought you not rather to mourn? Let him who has done this be removed from among you.*

Instead of mourning together for what has happened, and mourning for the punishment there is to come for this man and woman, just like the Israelites (perhaps) mourned for Achan and his family, and also for the people who were proud and wanted to become the high priest themselves instead of Aaron #todo/opzoeken 
The expectance of these people who knew the Bible should have been that these people should have died, if not by God's hand then by their own (as in the case of stoning and more specifically after the worship of the golden calves). If not death, then excommunication or another form of punishment. Yet none of this happened, they left it for what it was and instead they were fighting with each other about who was greater than the other because each thought their master was better. 
Apparently they did not think very much of this sin. How immoral can one be in their thoughts to think little of something like this, that it is merely a small matter of a small sin, an internal and private "family" matter? 
No, they do not realize that they, the Corinthian church, are one family right now and one body. So not only is it a family matter, it is *their* family matter. They are part of it and guilty for not solving this. More than just a family matter, it is a bodily matter, that is of the local congregation, and it makes it their responsibility. God will hold the whole church accountable for not dealing correctly with this situation. 

*3 For though absent in body, I am present in spirit; and as if present, I have already pronounced ::judgment:: on the one who did such a thing. 4 ::When you are assembled in the name of the Lord Jesus:: and my spirit is present, with the power of our Lord Jesus, 5 you are to ~deliver this man to Satan~ for the destruction of the flesh, so that his ~spirit may be saved~ in the day of the Lord.*

Paul has already pronounced judgment on this person. We have learned that we should be careful with judging. Jesus told us that with the measure we judge others, we will be judged ourselves. This, however, is applied in cases where it is not sure why a person committed a specific sin. For example, if someone has stolen something, we could consider the possibility that the thief is poor and needs to take care of his family, or perhaps his conscience was weak, and he really wanted something or he thought it was not a very big sin, such as illegally downloading videos. Another example is that when one lies, it could be that he is very afraid or being put under much social pressure to lie and that he is simply not mature enough yet to speak the truth. 
In this case of the Corinthians, however, there is no excuse at all. The man who committed this atrocious sin could not have been in any situation which would justify this act—there could for example not have been a situation in which he was forced to do this or not have known the gravity of this sin, for even the pagans did not commit such an atrocious crime against their own father and (step)mother and the Romans even penalized such crimes with an execution. As for the judgment Paul pronounced on this man, Paul would have asked for not other treatment than the treatment with which he judges this man. This *judgment*, which is probably translated from the word *condemnation*, is that this man is to be delivered to Satan. #todo/opzoeken/greek 
Note that the whole purpose of this is *so that* (Gr. hine) the sinner's spirit may be saved. This does not mean that if this act is done (that is, delivering this man to the Satan) then he will be saved. Rather, it means that this act should be done with the purpose of saving him, which will not always happen though. A parent who punishes his child does this *so that* his child will revert to the right path, but it is never certain whether the child obey. So the *hine*-clause only indicates an intention, but not the actual result. 

Also, note very carefully that Paul ::*commands*:: the congregation to do this *only* when they are 
1. assembled
2. in the name of the Lord Jesus
3. Paul's spirit is present
4. with the power of the Lord Jesus.

**Ad 1. The assembly.** This delivery to Satan, which could most likely be interpreted as casting this sinner out of the church, into the world, which is Satan's, should not be done by a single person nor a group of elders, but must be done by the whole assembly—for two reasons: 
1. the whole assembly is responsible to deal with this sin
2. the whole assembly must know the severity of this sin

Take for example the sin of stoning. This was to be done by the whole assembly of the men in a community. Israel consisted of at least two million people and about half were men. It would be impractical to stone a certain person with a million men, so I think we can interpret this as only the men in the community. The children and women did not need to be there, as the women needed to take care of the children—this act of punishment is not suited for their young eyes, for logical reasons—but I do assume they would be told about it. The women also did not need to be there, because this part of society was the man's responsibility. For the same reason—even though women would be perfectly capable of this—beul #todo/opzoeken/engels were always men, and even now—where the death penalty is a mere switch or knob that turns on the electricity on a chair, opens a floor board or where it is a simple injection or firing of a bullet—the job is still, not mainly, but *always* (as far as I know) done by men. 

**Ad 2. In the Name of the Lord Jesus.** When society has gone awry the people will become pathological in their desires and proliferate in the most vulgar forms of entertainment. In the Middle Ages for example we saw that the people attended weekly public executions—hangings, decapitations and even worse forms of executions—as a form of entertainment; in the Roman empire Christian persecution and torture to death in the Roman Colosseum was also a form of mass entertainment. When the assembly comes together *in the Name of the Lord Jesus*, however—we are speaking of Christians here—they come together in humility and sadness, for their family member has sinned against their own Father and ::against them::. 
The atrocious sin committed is against the Father in the first place, but it is also against the body. When we look at a family, how many children sin (all of them of course) or put differently: how many of the children's sins are because of their parents' sin? In the same way, how many sins started within the Church that arose from specific church members and then spread on to other church members? The pastor is a big example, for if he sins, many others will sin. When there is a financial scandal in church for example, it rarely is only the pastor covering up his spending behavior. Take the example of Singapore megachurch leader Hung Kee #todo/opzoeken who embezzled millions of (Singapore) dollars from the government by not reporting this to the Tax Revenue Services, and eventually went to jail for about five years. So many people in that church were involved in this case, such as his wife, the board and their treasurer. 
Bill Hybels and Ravi Zacharias #tags/famouspeople/christian literally sinned against Christians, for their victims were Christian, but they sinned against the Church as a whole as well by giving Christians a bad reputation because of their actions. 

**Ad 3. The presence of Paul's spirit.** So if the whole assembly comes together and they long to do what Jesus wants—which is what it means to come together *in His Name*—and carry the responsibility together. Paul adds to this that his spirit should be present, indicating that the Corinthians should act in the spirit or way of all that Paul has said and done or what he would say and do if here were there. Now is not a time to be soft, but to be righteous and #todo/opzoeken/engels  daadkrachtig, just like Paul was. They should not linger, postponing the punishment or arguing about it, but put it into effect as soon as possible. 

**Ad 4. With the power of our Lord Jesus.** Executing all of this takes quite a bit of courage, both for the elders as well as for the congregation who have never experienced something like this before. The elders who are on the softer side of human relations would especially have more problems with this issue because it might lead people to leave the church, due to a "lack" of love—while this is actually exactly the opposite, it is *because* of their love for the sinner that they are doing this. It is also because of their love for the other church members that they are doing this (see note on v.6). It is because of these weaknesses that we need the power of the Lord Jesus to make these decisions and implement them. 
There are times that we need to break relationships with other people because they are not good for us, but also because they are not good for the others themselves, but mostly because the behavior in the relation does not glorify God. 
**Example.** There was a 35 (or more)-year old guy who still lived with this parents, who neither contributed financially nor in effort such as in cleaning the house, and was playing videogames all day long. His mother still did his laundry and cooked for him. The parents had asked the son to move out several times, but he refused and eventually he even threatened to sue his parents for kicking out a tenant #todo/opzoeken/engels huurder, upon which the parents eventually had to call the police. 
The codependent behavior of the parents ended there, which is a good thing, and it would neither be good for the parents nor for the son to stay there, as he would never learn to grow up and take responsibility. #todo/opzoeken news article The parents required a lot of power to take this action, as any parent would who loves his child.

*6 Your boasting is not good. Do you not know that a little leaven leavens the whole lump? 7 Cleanse out the old leaven that you may be a new lump, as you really are unleavened. ::For:: Christ, our Passover lamb, has been sacrificed. 8 Let us therefore celebrate the festival, not with the ::old leaven::, the leaven of malice and evil, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.*

Why does Paul refer to the boasting again? Is he referring to this because this boasting is symbolized by this little leaven? Perhaps the Corinthians were doing very well as Christians. David Pawson #tags/famouspeople/christian for example claimed that the Corinthians had the full package of spiritual gifts, speaking in tongues, etc. #todo/opzoeken waar heeft hij dat vandaan? and probably used these gifts to help others as well. But this boasting—and in effect the ignoring of the great sin mentioned in v.1—is like leaven, in comparison with the great deal of good things and spiritual gifts they have they "only" have the sin of boasting, but this sin will spread throughout the congregation if it is not contained.

As for v.7. why is Christ used here as the reason why the old leaven must be removed? We know of course that because Christ has died for us, we should change our ways. He died so that we could have a new life, without the curse of sin in our lives, and he is offering us this way, but we need to act as well to not fall back into our old ways.
Would it have something to do with the Passover lamb, for Paul does not simply mention "because Christ died for us" but rather that the the Passover lamb has been *sacrificed* for us. Perhaps this is a reference to the Old Testament where the Passover lamb was during Passover, and hence, the bread had to be eaten unleavened. Moreover, however, the Passover lamb was sacrificed and its blood was smeared on the doorposts. This lamb was slaughtered for the sin of each family instead of the oldest son. The literal Passover lamb could symbolically remove all sin, and so here the symbolic Passover lamb, which is Jesus, can literally remove all of our sin. But more than just a personal removal of leaven from our hearts, is the removal of the external factor that can put leaven in our hearts, which is in this case the continuously and consciously sinning individual. 

About v.8. If malice and evil are mixed in with sincerity and truth, the whole cannot be called sincere and true anymore.  A statement that contains truth and a lie is simply a lie. Therefore as Christians we cannot mingle with hypocrites, but also if we want to stay completely in the truth, we need to cast out everything that is not true within us. A Christian who lives a perfect life, except for one sexually immoral sin, will be remembered by that one sin—not only by unbelievers, but also by believers, although it is the unbeliever who might be kept away from the Christian faith because of this one sin. 
**Example.** oud telefoonhoesje met nieuwe telefoon #todo/nogaftemaken #church/material/sermon

*9 I wrote to you in my letter not to associate with sexually immoral people— 10 not at all meaning the sexually immoral of this world, or the greedy and swindlers, or idolaters, since then you would need to go out of the world. 11 But now I am writing to you not to associate with anyone who ~::bears:: the name of brother~ if he is guilty of sexual immorality or greed, or is an idolater, reviler, drunkard, or swindler—not even to eat with such a one.*

The first two verses are so clear that I do not even need to explain these. We are in this world and we cannot prevent dealing or working with immoral people. What would it matter then whether we deal with sexually immoral, greedy or hypocrite people? Why would Paul make an exception for us to not associate with hypocrites?
Hypocrites are worse in general, but Christian hypocrites are the worst. Dealing with hypocrites can lead others to think one of two things: we are hypocrites ourselves as well or we do not know that these people are hypocrites. In the latter case there's not a very big problem, although people might think Christians are naive, but in the former case we have a big problem. This is what happens when we do not condemn and expel the sinner from our midst. 
Muslims for example surely are not all terrorists, but they (or at least many of the Islamic organizations) refuse to condemn certain Islamic groups, such as the *Muslim Brotherhood*—out of fear, that probably is, but still. The Roman-Catholic church has rarely openly condemned the abuse of children by priests. Christianity has for this reason a bad image in the eyes of unbelievers. Christians should stand up for each other, but even more so for the truth. And if a sinning person in the congregation does not repent he probably is not even a Christian and the argument of standing up for one's brother would not even matter anymore (for he is not even a "brother" himself let alone the brother of another person). 
Now protestants have a better reputation in the eyes of outsiders, although quite often these do not even know the difference between catholics and protestants. For example, those within the ministries of Bill Hybels and Ravi Zacharias  #tags/famouspeople/christian defended their leaders, yet not because of their loyalty but because of their naivety. But in the case of Hung Kee #todo/opzoeken naam there really was clear evidence for tax fraud and still they defended him, and in the case of Joseph Prince #tags/famouspeople, who did not fraud, but who received a big salary from his church, the board refused to publicize his salary, even though that should be public information, at least to the congregation members(Footnote: The board merely said that ministers receive a salary based on their attribution to the church. In Prince's case he is most likely working the hardest and the main attraction of the church. The ministry would most likely not even continue without his presence. But are we talking about a reasonable percentage and amount. I would suppose not, otherwise, if it were a reasonable one, this would have been presented without any problems. The fact that they hide it, means that there is something to be hidden. The fact that Prince later on decided not to receive any salary anymore but live off of the profits of his book sellings also means that his income is high enough to suffice in his monthly spendings (which are not little, I have not seen this myself, but I have heard of his expensive car and house). #tags/theology/falsegospel/prosperity
This also raises the question why he did not offer to stop receiving salary from the church sooner, for his book(s) #tags/books, especially *Destined to Reign* which made him famous, were published before this moment. One could also ask why he did not return the salary he received over the years like Rick Warren #tags/famouspeople/christian did. Should every Christian do this who receives money from the church? Perhaps not, but do note that we are talking about millions of dollars of income here. The salary Rick Warren received from his church prior to becoming a millionaire with his book #tags/books *The Purpose Drive Life* was probably modal and relatively less and hence easier to return. Perhaps Prince's salary was already in the hundreds of thousands or millions when before he became self-sufficient and hence the amount to pay all of his salary back became increasingly less attractive.).
 
Why this is such a big sin that Paul needs to explicitly mention this, is because this person *bears* the name of Christ. He is calling himself a brother, which is not a name but the status of a person who is saved by Christ. So if one is saved by Christ but is still a hypocrite that will not show the world that Christ's saving power is not enough to change a person, but rather it will show the world that Christ Himself is bad, for students follow teachers. 
For the same reason the Third Commandment in Exodus 20 has this same word, although wrongly translated as *take* in 
> (ESV) You shall not take the name of the LORD your God in vain  
where *take* should have been translated (or be interpreted) as "carry" according to Dennis Prager #tags/famouspeople, which is similar to *bearing* in this verse. When one uses the name of God, be it "Yahweh", "Jesus" or "God", in either word or deed, he is bearing the Name—that is the reputation—of God. The same applies for carrying the name of "brother."
So this implies that when one sins—which is already a bad thing—as a *Christian*, even when he is not being hypocritical, and someone else sees this—especially if this is an unbeliever—this is a worse sin than if he were not a Christian for the Christian will always impact God with any sin he does.

*12 For what have I to do with judging outsiders? Is it not those inside the church whom you are to judge? 13 God judges those outside. “Purge the evil person from among you.”*

We have been put in a certain position to be able to judge Christians. We have experienced what it is like to live in the spirit, while still having a fleshly body. We have known temptations and desires and needs, so we have a right of speaking. If not as one individual, then at least as an assembly we do have a broader range of experience and knowledge sufficient to bear the position of judge. We should not think too lightly nor too heavily of this position. Yes it is a very serious position to be able to judge others, but we have been given the spirit and it is the spirit who provides this wisdom to us, unlike the judges of this world who have worldly wisdom and experience but need to rely on that and on the wisdom of their predecessors and can *only* rely on these. Even worse, they cannot deviate from the decisions of their predecessors, called *precedents*. So if one judge decided that in a specific case a specific punishment was or was not given, all other judges in similar situations are obliged to hold the same standard, unless it can be proven that the current case in question is different than the original one on which the precedent was based. However, this does not make any sense, for what determines that the first judge was right in the first place? Nothing, except for the law, which is made by humans. And we know the law has flaws and that judges most definitely have flaws and are corruptible, if not with money, then with sex or power. 

#biblestudy/devotionals/1corinthians

#tags/bible/1corinthians