# 1 Corinthians 16 (ESV) 
***The Collection for the Saints***
*1 Now concerning the collection for the saints: as I directed the churches of Galatia, so you also are to do. 2 On the first day of every week, each of you is to put something aside and store it up, as he may prosper, so that there will be no collecting when I come. 3 And when I arrive, I will send those whom you accredit by letter to carry your gift to Jerusalem. 4 If it seems advisable that I should go also, they will accompany me.*

Paul recognizes that there are situations where he needs to guide his "students". In this particular case, it is perhaps because there is a lot of money that is to be taken care of, where the students might be tempted to make use of this themselves. There could have been methods to prevent this, for example by writing in the letter the exact amount they had donated, or by sending them a seal, with which they could pick up the money near Jerusalem, instead of carrying it with them on their journey, which was heavy, but also exposed to the dangers of robbers and shipwrecks.
Perhaps this was the reason Paul considered going, but there could have been other reasons as well. It is clear that when Paul wrote "**they will accompany me**" it is the student who will accompany *him* and not the other way around, possibly meaning that if he were to go, he would of course assume leadership. 
One might think what is the difference in the meaning between Paul accompanying his student or the other way around. In Dutch many also say that one's father looks like his child, but in Chinese (grammar) this is not allowed. Because the father was there first, one should always say that the child looks like his father. Perhaps for the same reason Paul is saying it this way, even though his students were the ones planning for the travel and Paul "joined them" later on. 
We would think it strange for an outsider to join us when had already made plans and that the outsider then assumes leadership and also decides or even changes his plans. In Acts we saw that Paul often changed parts of his plans, being led by the Holy Spirit, which would also have its implications on the students whose plans would then be regularly changed by Paul. 
However, we can see this as a good thing. Paul had the authority of an apostle and was speaking on behalf of Christ. Are we willing to let an "outsider" lead our lives, someone who joined later, when we had already made plans for it? And then, when we—perhaps reluctantly—do so, will we allow this person to continuously change his plans depending on a "versatile" factor? If the students recognized that it was not Paul joining them later, but that it was Paul who organized everything *from the start*, where he built the church, strengthened, instructed and trained it, and how he taught them to make plans for collecting and sending the money, where this letter was perhaps merely a reminder or formalisation, the students would have less problems with this "outside" joining, for he was not and outsider, but the very first who started this. 

***Plans for Travel***
*5 I will visit you after passing through Macedonia, for I intend to pass through Macedonia, 6 and perhaps I will stay with you or even spend the winter, so that you may help me on my journey, wherever I go. 7 For I do not want to see you now just in passing. I hope to spend some time with you, if the Lord permits. 8 But I will stay in Ephesus until Pentecost, 9 for a wide door for effective work has opened to me, and there are many adversaries.*

At the same time that the Lord had opened a door for effective work, meaning that God gave Paul an opportunity to accomplish much work, there were many adversaries. Some doors just contain both, both the adversaries and the opportunities.  
**Example.** In Chinese the word for opportunity (危機) consists of the two characters for danger (危險) and opportunity (機會). #todo/nogaftemaken 
Not only in Paul's, but in every Christian's life this will be the case. Effective work without adversary does not exist. It is a principle of life, which can be applied holistically and God has etched these principles as if they were laws of physics. Just like God is a god of order and requires order in nature, so God has created order in "life" #todo/nogaftemaken  distinguish between life vs death and life as in "living".  #church/material/sermon

Note that Paul did not enter the door opened to him by God in Troas (2 Corinthians 2:12), but left for Macedonia instead because of unrest in his spirit. We do not know whether Paul made the right decision there. He was much sensitive to the Spirit, but was this unrest from his own or from the Holy Spirit? Is one ever allowed to ignore a door opened to one by God or does God purposely open doors in order to test us? 

*10 When Timothy comes, see that you put him at ease among you, for he is doing the work of the Lord, as I am. 11 So let no one despise him. Help him on his way in peace, that he may return to me, for I am expecting him with the brothers.*

It is almost unthinkable that Paul even needed to ask such a thing of the Corinthians concerning his student. The Corinthians should already be familiar with Timothy for he was present when Paul last visited Corinth. #todo/opzoeken  waar? But even if he were not, he is Paul's disciple. Why would they ever mistreat the disciple of the one who helped them found ( #todo/opzoeken already founded?) their church. Why would they despise him? The answer is, perhaps, because the Corinthians were not that friendly as the examples the Bible gives us of Middle-Eastern hospitality. Even Laban welcomed his nephew, albeit hypocritically and for lust of money, but always under the guise of hospitality. 
The Corinthians were not (all) Jewish or Israelites, and even if they were, they had abandoned part of their culture. In modern-day Israel too the culture is a mix of the national backgrounds of its inhabitants. Jews from all over the world migrated to Israel after the Second World War, having brought with them their culture, which is present in their food, but also in their behavior(Footnote: See also Sarah Lanier's #tags/famouspeople/christian book #tags/books *Foreign to Familiar* where this is described in more detail.). Jews can be separated into two groups. On one side there are secular Jews, who are well integrated into the culture of the country they live in, but on the other side there are orthodox Jews who retain their own culture and language and even instruct their progeny to do so. Ben Shapiro #tags/famouspeople is one of those orthodox Jews, still wearing a yamulke #todo/opzoeken/engels hat and perhaps also clothes made of one fabric only, but Dennis Prager too, who was raised an orthodox, but is now not secular, but somewhere in the middle, learned Hebrew from a young age on. 
Now orthodoxy was already present in some way, such as people like the Pharisees and scribes—but I am not speaking of their hypocrisy nor of their legalism, but of their inclination to keep the Law of Moses and keep themselves separated from anything of the world—but the orthodox movement perhaps increased in numbers when they saw their own people leaving for the world. In the same way, the presence of the United States in Iran and the political and cultural implications it brought with them led to the rise of (ultra) radical Islam #tags/religion/islam. 
We have already seen the influence of the pagan people on the people in the church. They went to church, they repented (although I doubt whether *everyone* Paul addressed was actually Christian. I believe Paul made a general address. In the case of the man who committed fornication with his (step)mother I do not believe this is a Christian, for example, while in the case where some Corinthians attended temple rites and ate of the food there, I do believe these could be Christians and former Jews who thought that the ceremonial laws and especially those concerning food were not valid #todo/opzoeken  beter woord, anymore—perhaps after Peter's "instructions" after his vision of the sheet with all animals, if they ever heard of this.
We already say the Corinthians did not have any of the Middle-Easter hospitality when it came to eating and drinking, when they started even before some others arrived. We also see know from Paul's second letter that the Corinthians did not listen to the admonitions in his first letter, but rebelled. Paul had even been there for a short while, according to David Pawson #tags/famouspeople/christian in his book #tags/books *Unlocking the Bible*, but it was of no use. The Corinthians' hearts were much too hardened. So it was only logical that Paul asked the Corinthians to take good care of Timothy and to warn Timothy to be strengthened in the Lord and not stray from His Word. #todo/opzoeken is this what 1,2 Timothy is about? 

***Final Instructions***
*12 Now concerning our brother Apollos, I strongly urged him to visit you with the other brothers, but it was not at all his will to come now. He will come when he has opportunity.*
*13 Be watchful, stand firm in the faith, ::act like men::, be strong. 14 Let all that you do be done in love.*

It is not wrong for one to call upon men to act as such. Rather yet, it is *Biblical* and when men do not behave as such, other men and women should call on them to *act like men*. 
In this feminized world where man are ever motivated and encouraged to show their feminine side and repress their masculinity, new buzz words keep popping up as fashionable trends in order to normalize the gender switch and minimize the difference between between the two sexes and the accompanying traits that God has given to people. Terms #todo/opzoeken/engels uitspraken such as these are #todo/opzoeken/engels  gebagatelliseerd of worden weggedaan, minimized. 
Transvestites and transsexuality (with or without  surgery) have always existed. This was even publicly accepted in the Roman years and all but one emperor had surrogate men as "wives". However, even millenia before that, all the way back to ancient Sumer and most likely even earlier, hermaphrodite gods were worshipped, such as Ishtar #todo/opzoeken who is the brother-husband of Ashtarte. This says a lot about the people who worshipped these gods as well, for if they were not into this perversion of sexuality, they probably would have created another god. 
In my younger years this trend was justified under the guise of fashion. In the 90s men were supposedly called *metrosexual*—a combination of words #todo/opzoeken/engels of *metropolitan* and *sexuality*, indicating that in metropolitan cities it was "okay" for men to care for their esthetics, as if implying that Maslow's pyramid had a hidden level for men where they could express their inner longing for being beautiful. 
After metrosexuality, however, things were very quiet on this subject, and slowly but surely more people were added to the list of coming out of the closet, most well-known perhaps for millenials born in the 80s is Ellen DeGeneres #tags/famouspeople/actors, after which every year or so another actor or singer came out, with continuously lower ages and worse diagnoses but also with worse behavior, such as Miley Cyrus who claimed to be bi-sexual, but also had sex with many people #todo/opzoeken/engels  and even cheated on her own husband, Liam Hemsworth, after having been married for only a few months. 
Now, however, people take puberty blocking pills to stop the growth of their secondary sexual organs and describing themselves as non-binary transgender or fluid #tags/lgbt. The growth of this trend has been "more than exponential" (if that were even possible) and has more than normalized, in the sense that if anyone does not find this normal he is a bigot and homophobe. 
How does the world expect people who always lived in a normal world with normal values to change their minds on sexual moral values within a few years? The world expects this because they themselves have been continuously brainwashed by the (social) media, news and education system. It cannot understand others—who are not online all the time and who have not been brainwashed—think otherwise. It is like accepting  children and women as lower valued beings—which is unthinkable in this day and age, although very common less than a 100 years ago. Hence we see third world countries with less influence from the West, Muslim countries (which usually are part of the third world—with the exception of Iran, which therefore also has a high tendency towards this perversed Western view of sexual morals) and *true* Christians (because they do neither follow the (social) media, news because they spend their time on the mission, but also because they adhere to their Christian beliefs) still on the side of correct sexual moral values. 

*15 Now I urge you, brothers—you know that the household of Stephanas were the first converts in Achaia, and that they have devoted themselves to the service of the saints— 16 be subject to such as these, and to every fellow worker and laborer. 17 I rejoice at the coming of Stephanas and Fortunatus and Achaicus, because they have made up for your absence, 18 for they refreshed my spirit as well as yours. Give recognition to such people.*

Though our joy and peace should be from God alone, it is always good to see Christians having been faithful over long periods of time. Stephanas, who was the first convert, was still faithful to the mission after approximately 15 years(Footnote: Paul must have met Stephanas somewhere between 47-52 AD, and this letter was written in 65 AD.) #todo/opzoeken when Paul wrote this letter. 
As human beings Paul needed company. In Athens he "reluctantly" sent Timothy (1 Thessalonians 3:1) to visit the Thessalonians, because he needed to hear from them. In the same verse it says that Paul "could bear it no longer" to not hear from the Thessalonians. Not only did he miss them so much, he also wanted to know how they were doing spiritually and he wanted to build them up in these fields to become more holy. 
It does not say that he *reluctantly* sent Timothy, but I assume this because he was not willing to miss anyone on this mission. In some of his letters he ends with the names of some who have left God and consequently him on his mission. Of course it is bad to lose a friend and a person of whom one thought he was a brother, but it is even worse to know that he has left God and will not join the mission anymore. 
All the more rejoiced is Paul then when not only Stephanas but also Fortunatus and Achaicus come and help him, so that not only he is not alone, and has extra helpers with him in the mission but also he can see the fruit of his labor, of his investment in Stephanas and his household. 

1. company
2. helpers
3. know how everything is doing, to see that people are doing well (mission)
4. to see that people have grown in Christ (missionaries)

***Greetings***
*19 The churches of Asia send you greetings. Aquila and Prisca, together with the church in their house, send you hearty greetings in the Lord. 20 All the brothers send you greetings. Greet one another with a holy kiss.*

Some mention this as a command. In my humble opinion, however, this is merely a command to greet one *sincerely* and simply as a "hi-bye". Paul wants the churches to ask for one another's wellbeing, just like he has, and to pass on knowledge of one's situation, whether good or bad, to other churches, so they can be encouraged or pray for it (cf. Ephesians 6:19 where Paul asks the Ephesians to pray for him, specifically for boldness in his words). 

*21 I, Paul, write this greeting with my own hand. 22 If anyone has no love for the Lord, let him be accursed. Our Lord, come! 23 The grace of the Lord Jesus be with you. 24 My love be with you all in Christ Jesus. Amen.*

In most or all #todo/opzoeken of his letters Paul mentions something about those who do not love the Lord anymore. He mentions those who left him, as an example for the receivers of the letter to stay on the right path, or he reprimands those who do not love the Lord and stray away from His teachings. #todo/nogaftemaken 

#tags/bible/1corinthians
#biblestudy/devotionals/1corinthians


#todo  
- [x] eten regelen voor dinsdag Chris (rijst, 
- [ ] #todo/familytime difference between amateur and professional wrestling


#todo  #todo/familytime
rechtvaardigheid = righteousness
rechtvaardigen = justify
recht/gerechtigheid = justice

overtuigen = convince
overtuiging = conviction
oordeel = judgment 
oordelen = judge
veroordelen = condemn 
veroordeling = condemnation/conviction

troublesome #todo/opzoeken/engels  voor Nathan 

