# 1 Corinthians 11:2-34 (ESV) 
***Head Coverings***
*2 Now I commend you because you remember me in everything and maintain the traditions even as I delivered them to you.*

Paul often gives compliments to his churches, but personally I would not have commended this church after all the sins mentioned in the previous chapters—encouraging weak brothers to eat meat from idols, not addressing the issue of sexual immorality and dragging each other to a secular court, to name but a few. But they did to what Paul mentions here, which is they remembered him in everything—perhaps they often wrote him letters, or they remembered the things he taught them, but these things that happened in this letter perhaps were not explicitly taught—and maintained the traditions. For sure, it is good to commend people for what they do well and not only to admonish them for what they do wrong. 

*3 But I want you to understand that the head of every man is Christ, the head of a wife is her husband, and the head of Christ is God. 4 Every man who prays or prophesies with his head covered dishonors his head,*

Should a man not cover his head out of respect for Christ? I still do not get the logic of what is written here. #biblestudy/questions There might have been some kind of "cultural" thing, as Paul is referring to in v.14, which he claims is not cultural but natural. Hence we see in every  country that women have long hair and men short, unless it has been changed by the culture or by practical conditions. In the Qing dynasty of China #tags/country/china, for example, men were obliged to have a certain haircut which involved long hair. In North-Korea #tags/country/northkorea men and women can only choose from certain haircuts with no option of long hair. In Africa, on the other hand, black people traditionally have had short hair, whether they lived in the city or in the jungle, as the heat and humidity would not make long hair comfortable or practical, especially not with #todo/opzoeken/engels kroeshaar. In Jamaica that might be different, but there, again, it is part of culture or even their (rastafari) religion to have long hair, just like the Sikhs in India #tags/religion/hinduism and the Nazarenes in Israel. 
Paul then claims that this *natural* tendency towards short hair for man is imbued in his nature as well as the tendency towards long hair for women. Even today where women have short haircuts, their hair is generally speaking still longer than that of men, except when they are lesbian or want to be men. 
In the same way this natural aspect of covering or not covering our heads has been almost completely removed from and by our culture. In European cultures, such as in the United King and the Netherlands, women still wear hats during formal occassions. This is seen by the people as an influence of the church, while actually it is the other way around. It is nature itself that shows that man should have short hair and women long hair. First of all because of baldness in men and long and fuller hair in women due to hormonal differences (from *MacSBNnkjv*). For the second reason, see notes on v.11. 

So in short, a man should not cover his head with a hat or anything else during his prayer, for this would dishonor his physical head and thus dishonor his figurative head, which is Christ. The addressees of this letter understood that part because that was still part of their culture.

*5 but every wife who prays or prophesies with her head uncovered dishonors her head, since it is the same as if her head were shaven.*

A discussion that arises here is whether Paul is speaking about head coverings in the form of the hair itself or a material covering, such as a cloth or hat. In the former case, if a woman were to have short hair and thus not covering her head, "it is the same as if her head were shaven" according to Paul, meaning that the same shame will be on the whether she is bald or shorthaired. Indeed, on the field of women's dress we know that whether a woman wears a very small bikini and thong, or something that so clearly accentuates her curves and shows big parts of the bosom, she might as well have been naked, and the shame would not be different. However, see also notes on v.6.
Again, I emphasize that the image of a woman with short hair in these days is very different from then. Even in the Japanese 80s manga #tags/manga *Ranma 1/2* we see a girl is shocked when her long hair accidentally cut short, which is then, however, perceived as cute by the protagonist. Also in Disney's *Tangled* #tags/movies we also see that after Rapunzel cut her hair she looked even better and more "modern", as if she had just been to a hairdresser. But our image of a woman with short hair when we read this chapter should be that of a woman whose hair has been forcibly pulled and cut with knives, as a punishment. The result then is not a fine haircut, but a mess of shorter and longer plucks of hair, going into all directions.

*6 For if a wife will not cover her head, then she should cut her hair short.*

Another question here is whether this concerns all women or only the wives? #biblestudy/questions
Paul means that a woman's hair should not be seen by others (I think, or at least when they are praying), so if she does not want to cover her hair, then it is better that her long hair is cut short. Compare this with breasts. Just like long hair is for the woman's glory (see v.15) so are her breasts, but these too should be covered, or they should be removed to reduce the shame. 
**Example.** I once saw a video testimony of a woman who had her breasts amputated due to breast cancer. She showed her bare and flattened chest, not without any shame, but with far less shame then she would have when she still had her breasts. Her shame was not due to the fact that she bared her chest, but due to the disgrace that as a woman she had no breasts anymore. 
This is what Paul is writing about. Supposing for the moment that a man can bare his chest in public without any shame over his nakedness, a woman would have this same prerogative if she had the same chest, but it would be a disgrace. Hence we see young children, both boys and girls, with bare chests running around in the summer, without any shame, but only until breast development starts. 
In this case it does not matter whether the woman is married or not, her glory should not be seen by anyone else but her husband, and if she has none, then by no one. However, can we apply this principle of the female breast to hair as well? The Muslims #tags/religion/islam have done this and commanded that every woman over the age of #todo/opzoeken twelve should wear a scarve. However, it must be noted that the reason for their covering is not because of their submission to the man, spouse or to the angels, but purely due to harassment by men. Muhammad used the *hijab* #todo/opzoeken/engels spelling, i.e. a cloth covering the hair, as a sign that this woman was already taken (by him, but it could be used by other men as well). Also, he did not specify, like Paul, whether everything or only the main part of the head should be covered. #todo/opzoeken in Koran opzoeken. My image of the Middle-East is that people in general do not completely cover their heads, which is uncomfortable and inconvenient, but letting it hang loosely allows for more airflow and shadow against the sun as well, as an extra comfort. 

*But since it is disgraceful for a wife to cut off her hair or shave her head, let her cover her head.*

Now about the second part of this verse. If the interpretation is that the long hair is the covering itself is true, then if a woman has long hair, how can this verse be interpreted, for she is already covering her head; And if her hair is short and not covering her head, then how can she cut it short, when it already is?  
From this we can conclude that the covering in v.6 is not with the hair but with something *on top of* the hair. The hair, even though it is the woman's glory, needs to be covered, just like Moses covered the glory on his face. #todo/opzoeken  referentie in ot en nt

However, this might contradict the second part of v.15 where Paul says that the hair itself is the covering, but see notes there. 

*7 For a man ought not to cover his head, since he is the image and glory of God, but woman is the glory of man. 8 For man was not made from woman, but woman from man. 9 Neither was man created for woman, but woman for man. 10 That is why a ::wife:: ought to have a symbol of authority on her head, because of the ::angels::.*

#biblestudy/questions What do the angels have to do with this? According to *MacSBNnkjv* the angels are watching over humanity to see if things go wrong, one of those things being that man rebels against the natural order. So both men and women should not go against the natural order and wear or take off their head coverings when appropriate.

*11 Nevertheless, in the Lord woman is not independent of man nor man of woman; 12 for as woman was made from man, so man is now born of woman. And all things are from God. 13 Judge for yourselves: is it proper for a wife to pray to God with her head uncovered? 14 Does not nature itself teach you that if a man wears long hair it is a disgrace for him,*

It is nature itself that tells us that this is natural and perhaps Paul wrote this in Scripture for this very reason, namely that the natural things and perception thereof would disappear in future cultures. It is just like how homosexuality, which is not a natural thing, has snucked into our culture and Western people now think that most people think this is strange because of what we have been *taught*, by either culture or church. But it is the exact opposite! Homosexuality has always been perceived as something unnatural and it was only accepted by sexually immoral people such as the Romans, who divorced, committed polygamy and had orgies on a regular basis and included all kinds of sexual practices, probably even including bestiality and pedophilia(Footnote: With pedophilia I mean the intercourse with people *under* the age of 12. For children over the age of twelve this is called *hebephilia*, which was commonly accepted.). But even the Romans and Greeks did not consider this natural. Homosexuality between men of equal age was a rare phenomenon and it was rather the old men who had relationships or sexual services of young boys that was common. It was an act of lust, and that was permitted in that culture(Footnote: See also Plato's book #tags/books on love, *Symposium*, where multiple philosophers share their view on love.) , but it was never normal to have a relationship of that kind.

*15 but if a woman has long hair, it is her glory? For her hair is given to her for a covering.*

If the word "for" (Gr: ἀντί (anti)) is interpreted as "instead of" then this would mean that the woman can use her long hair as the covering of her head. This would contradict the explanation I have given above (which is irrelevant) but moreover it would contradict Paul's explanation in v.6:
> *(ESV) For if a wife will not cover her head, then she should cut her hair short.*   

#biblestudy/questions How should we interpret the last part of v.15 then, that the woman's hair is her covering, without having any contradictions? Even *MacSBNnkjv* stays silent here. David Pawson uses this as an argument that women do not have to wear head coverings, but that their long hair itself is the covering of their heads, neglecting v.6. 

Perhaps this could be translated as #composed/bible/1corinthians
> *For her hair is given her for it to be covered.*   
But I am being very flexible in my translation here and overlooking the word ἀντί. 

*16 If anyone is inclined to be contentious, we have no such practice, nor do the churches of God.*

This seems to be a random command popping up out of nowhere, but Paul always has an intention when doing that. (#todo/opzoeken waar eerder gedaan?)
In this case this could be linked to the preceding meaning that Paul does not want anyone fighting ovef this matter of whether a man or woman should wear head coverings. By the way, perhaps the matter was even more about men wearing head coverings than about women not wearing one, as according to MacArthur men were imitating the Jews who did so.
On the other hand, v.16 could also be related to thf next paragraph about the holy supper. Whereas Paul started this chapter with commending #todo/opzoeken/engels noun? the Corinthians, we now know that this is done out of respect and as a bridge to tell them what he does not commend them for.
This is done in verse 17, but verse 16 could be the stepping stone for that. In that case verse 16 should be part of the next paragraph and the whole should be translated somewhat differently as

> 1 Corinthians 11:16 (ESV)  
> 16 If anyone is inclined to be contentious, we have no such practice, nor do the churches of God. 17 *So* in the following instructions I do not commend you, because when you come together it is not for the better but for the worse.  

where I have replaced the *but* in verse 17 with *so*.

The meaning of verse 16 changes then from "Now I do not want anyone to argue over head coverings" into "I do not commend you because of your arguments."

***The Lord's Supper***
*17 But in the following instructions I do not commend you, because when you come together it is not for the better but for the worse. 18 For, in the first place, when you come together as a church, I hear that there are divisions among you. And I believe it in part,*

#biblestudy/questions What does Paul mean by believing it *in part*? Why would he not believe the whole truth that Phoebe had brought to him? Why would it be so difficult to believe that there are divisions in the church? It does not take a sceptic to know that even in the most perfect church there are divisions, if only in certain fields. Also, within divisions there are still divisions. In Dutch politics #tags/politics there is more than only a left and right wing, but there can be a plethora of parties across the political spectrum. But even one of the smallest parties among those, e.g. Forum voor Democratie, experienced an internal division in 2020 due to different views on the measurements taken against COVID-19 #tags/corona. The official story was that this was due to antisemitic slurs by members of the youth faction of FvD of which the party leader Thierry Baudet *supposedly* did not want to distantiate #todo/opzoeken/engels himself from and that he should accept responsibility by resigning as party leader. Either way, the party split not into two groups, but into multiple groups spread throughout the First and Second Chamber (Footnote: Something comparable to Congress and Senate in the United States, or the Lower and Upper House in the British system of government.).
It could hardly be that Paul is naive for even in his former religion of Judaism there were factions. It could be that he did not think that the newly planted church in Corinth which he discipled and taught and then was handed over to Apollos whom he and his disciples Aquila and Priscilla had taught, would so quickly develop into factions, but then again perhaps many years had passed at the time this letter was written.

*19 for there must be factions among you in order that those who are genuine among you may be recognized.*

This is a logical argument stating that when there genuine people they will become separate factions. This is not stating the opposite that when there are factions one of these factions must be the right one. It is expected that genuine people, sooner or later, will stand up to show their point #todo/opzoeken/engels  and when this brings no change in the status quo they leave their congregation and start their own. This always starts with factions *within* the congregation. Take for example Martin Luther #tags/famouspeople/christian who did not leave the Roman-Catholic Church at first, but tried to convince his superiors of the truth he learned, and afterwards the people through his books. 
It is a pity that there are factions, but these must happen in order for there to be change. When this does not happen within, then it should happen outside. 

*20 When you come together, it is not the Lord's supper that you eat. 21 For in eating, each one goes ahead with his own meal. One goes hungry, another gets drunk. 22 What! Do you not have houses to eat and drink in? Or do you despise the church of God and humiliate those who have nothing? What shall I say to you? Shall I commend you in this? No, I will not.*

If some people were late to dinner, or others arrived early, they were supposed to wait for each other before dinner was started, as was custom in that culture and still is in the Middle-East and Chinese cultures for example. However, the Lord's supper was eaten after the meal, so if dinner had already started, they would not have been too late for the Lord's supper. #biblestudy/questions It could be though that the bread and wine which was to be reserved for the Lord's supper, be it one or four cups, was all but finished. 
#todo/tothiergebleven

*23 For I received from the Lord what I also delivered to you, that the Lord Jesus on the night when he was betrayed took bread, 24 and when he had given thanks, he broke it, and said, “This is my body, which is for you. Do this in remembrance of me.” 25 In the same way also he took the cup, after supper, saying, “This cup is the new covenant in my blood. Do this, as often as you drink it, in remembrance of me.” 26 For as often as you eat this bread and drink the cup, you proclaim the Lord's death until he comes.*
*27 Whoever, therefore, eats the bread or drinks the cup of the Lord in an unworthy manner will be guilty concerning the body and blood of the Lord.*

Why would drinking from a cup in an unworthy manner make one guilty of murdering the Lord? The blood the Lord has poured out is meant for those who accept Him as their Savior and as a result accept His forgiveness. If this wine were limited, that is only those who drink from this cup will receive forgiveness, and one were to take this wine from others and drink it all by himself, leaving nothing to others, then he would be guilty of the fact that those people who could not drink it would go to hell. Jesus would then have died for nothing, because all the people he died for still ended up in hell. Even though Jesus voluntarily sacrificed himself, this person would then have caused Jesus' death because Jesus died for nothing. 
It would be like a judge who is about to execute a couple of prisoners. One innocent man rose up and said he was willing to die instead of all of those prisoners. The judge agreed with that proposal. After the innocent man died, the judge did not keep his word, however, and still executed these prisoners. The judge in that case would be guilty of murder, because even though the innocent man did all of this willingly, he let this man's life lose his life for nothing. #stories/bible/gospel #todo/nogaftemaken Geen doodstraf, maar meerdere jaren die optellen tot één levenslang.  
All of this would be when he drank all of it. The actions of this men would cause others to miss out on the forgiveness that Jesus's granted, because he took it all. More than that, the forgiveness in that cup would not even be granted to him, because he took it in an unworthy manner, so Jesus' death would have been a complete waste. 
However, these verses (v.23-27) are not talking about drinking all of the wine (although this has to do with the context), but about drinking it in an *unworthy manner*. So if this person drank only one sip and left enough for others, he would not deprive anyone of the forgiveness he needed. Moreover, we know that this wine and forgiveness is not limited. We can easily pour more wine into the cup, because the wine is merely a symbol. How, then, could this person be guilty of Jesus' death by his manner of drinking?

#stories/bible/gospel We can say that this single sip this person drank, was paid for by Jesus with His blood. If he threw away this wine, or spit it out, or swallowed it but in an unworthy manner, rendering this wine useless, then he were to be partially guilty of Jesus' agony and suffering. The same goes for when a father works hard, say a hundred hours, in order to buy a hundred gifts for just as many people, and one person throws his gift away, would he not be guilty of one hour of unpaid toil? This father would then have worked one hour for nothing, as if he had received no salary for that hour. 
"But", one would say, "what if I do not drink this wine at all? I simply reject this gift so that someone else can have it." In that case there are two possible answers. The first one is that the father bought less gifts than the number of children he had. So if he in fact had one hundred-and-one children, the one gift that was rejected could have been passed on to the child who did not have any, and the father's labor would not have been for nothing. 
The second answer is that the father bought enough gifts for exactly the amount of children he has. In this case then both the rejection and spoil of this gift would be a direct rejection of the father. #personal/family/familytime/done/1corinthians
What then is the answer? We know from v.27 that anyone who drinks in an unworthy manner is guilty. We also know that everyone who rejects the Father is just as guilty. This can only lead to the second answer then as being the correct lemma. 
This in turn would have impact on our view of the principle or lemma of *Limited Atonement* in the Calvinistic #biblestudy/theology/calvinism/limitedatonement Dordtse Stelregels, also known as T.U.L.I.P., which #todo/opzoeken/engels gaat uit van assumes? #todo/opzoeken  difference between assume and presume; the first answer as their lemma. According to this reasoning, then, the Father has made just as many gifts as He *wants to have* children. So if the world has eight billion people, the Father wants to have eight billion children, and each one rejecting the Father's gift is rejecting the Father Himself. 
If the Father created less than eight billion gifts, because He only wanted to have, e.g. he *destined* only seven billion to be His children, then if one billion people rejected His gift, less guilt would be on these people because these gifts could then be given to the other one billion people. If these one billion people were to reject the Father, who would then be guilty, the last one billion or those who rejected Him in the first place? The two billion people would both be just as guilty, but still, they would be less guilty than those who rejected him as per the lemma implied by the second answer. #church/material/sermon

*28 Let a person examine himself, then, and so eat of the bread and drink of the cup. 29 For anyone who eats and drinks without discerning the body eats and drinks judgment on himself.*

Those who do no eat and drink, because they do not believe in the healing power of Jesus' blood and His Resurrection already have judgment on themselves, because they have rejected the Lord's gracious gift. But what about those who do believe but do not drink? The answer is that the bread and wine should not be seen as the gift, but as a remembrance of the Lord, for His forgiveness for us. We already *have* accepted the gift, so when someone does not partake in the Holy Spirit it is not as if he does cannot accept this. 
#stories/bible/gospel For example, imagine someone has stolen an enormous amount from his neighbor, and his neighbor finds out. A few days later the neighbor comes by and addresses his mistakes, with love, and then has in his hands a present for him, of invaluable worth. This person, if he has a genuine repentance, would have a very difficult time in accepting this gift. #stories/bible/gospel
This is part of the Gospel, but it is not what I am talking about but merely an illustration of not being able to accept a gift. Here in v.28, however, it is not about *accepting* the gift, but remembering the One Who gave the gift. As soon as one has violated his own promise to the One Who saved him, it will be very hard to remember the One and the day that Jesus saved him. 
It is like one of those movies about black neighborhoods, such as *Boyz 'n the hood* starring Cuba Gooding Jr. #tags/famouspeople/actors  #tags/movies, where these people are deemed to live a live of criminality. An even better example is that of Clint Eastwood's #tags/famouspeople/actors *Gran Torino* #tags/movies where he even subtly depicts the person of Jesus Christ through his sacrifice for a young kid he had just acquainted with. This young kid remembers him in this movie and how Eastwood's character helped him walk the right path, which Hmong people are often "destined" to do. At the end, when Eastwood's character dies, he transfers his classic Gran Torino to him #todo/opzoeken/engels overerven
What if this young guy had gone into trouble again? Would he dare to use this car again that he inherited? It is his—he has *already accepted* this—but just stepping into the car or even looking at it, would remind him of what Eastwood's character had done for him. So now the kid has two options: either he stores away this car and never looks at it again so he can go on with his life, neglecting the gratitude he should have, or he can step into the car again, but admitting his fault and repairing it first. This could take some time, which would be analogous to skipping the Holy Supper for a good reason. 
There is a third option and that is what v.29 refers to. It is when one steps into the car anyway, neglecting his conscience. What will happen then? He will put a blemish on this grace he received. Ignoring one's conscience will ultimately lead to mental and sometimes physical issues. 

*30 That is why many of you are weak and ill, and some have died. 31 But if we judged ourselves truly, we would not be judged. 32 But when we are judged by the Lord, we are disciplined so that we may not be condemned along with the world.*

There is a way to prevent us from being judged and that is by judging ourselves. For if we do not do this, God will have to do this and that will be far worse. But even worse than that is if we are not judged at all. For God disciplines us so that we will repent and change so that we will not be judged on the Last Day. But if we are not disciplined by Him we will stay in our reckless ways and sinful behavior and be condemned along with the world. 

*33 So then, my brothers, when you come together to eat, wait for one another— 34 if anyone is hungry, let him eat at home—so that when you come together it will not be for judgment. About the other things I will give directions when I come.*

All of the above leads to this single message: wait for another before eating. Why is it so important to wait for another? It is the meaning behind it, especially in the context of that culture. Eating meant being part of the community, so when one did not wait for another, he was not really part of the community (this is how I interpret it). 
That, first of all, but even more important, they used the Holy Supper (1) as if it were mere food (2) leaving nothing to others and (3) doing this when these people had not even arrived. All of these reasons attributed to their sacrilege of Holy Supper.

#biblestudy/devotionals/1corinthians
#tags/bible/1corinthians

