# 1 Corinthians 14 (ESV) 
***Prophecy and Tongues***
*1 Pursue love, and earnestly desire the spiritual gifts, especially that you may prophesy.*

This verse should be read in conclave with #todo/opzoeken/engels 1 Corinthians 12:31-13:1 where Paul urges the Corinthians to desire the higher gifts (this also has a different interpretation, but see notes there) #todo/nogaftemaken  emphasizing that tongues are not  the gift that should be desired most. In this chapter Paul emphasizes again that they should pursue love instead of the gift of speaking in tongues and he specifically mentions the gift of prophecy in order to lead them away from speaking in tongues. 
#todo/nogaftemaken This is a technique to let people not do something by setting something next to what they want that is quite similar as in: "If you're going to do this anyway, at least do it like this." If you're going to have sex anyway, at least get married. ??
So now, in my own words, if you desire the gift of speaking in tongues, at least do this in a language that is understandable to all.

*2 For one who speaks in a tongue speaks not to men but to God; for no one understands him, but he utters mysteries in the Spirit. 3 On the other hand, the one who prophesies speaks to people for their upbuilding and encouragement and consolation. 4 The one who speaks in a tongue builds up himself, but the one who prophesies builds up the church.*

Paul is showing the contrast here between speaking in tongues and prophesying. Here prophesying does not necessarily mean foretelling the future or explanation of a series of facts through revelation, but the emphasis is on the language which is understandable, for every prophecy has always been spoken in a language that the people could understand. 
He is not stating the positive and negative of speaking in tongues, but it seems more like he is neutral about tongues and positive about prophecies. As a matter of fact he is pushing the Corinthians towards speaking an understandable language, as is clear from the rest of this chapter. Perhaps it could be said that Paul is negative about speaking in tongues, using phrases such as "no one understands him, but he utters mysteries" and "builds up himself". Now these terms may seem positive when the first quote has added "in the Spirit" so that it seems like a very spiritual thing, but given the context this is a negative thing for the purpose was and is to build up others and encourage those. 
Then Paul adds the second quote and this in itself might sound positive, i.e. that is building up himself—which is better then breaking down oneself—but it is neutral to negative in the context, for if everyone is building up and helping and encouraging others, but one person is not doing that, but only building up himself, would that not be a negative and perhaps even selfish thing to do? 
It could also be compared to someone who is studying the Bible and edifying himself. That seems like a great thing in itself, given that his intentions are right. But even with the right intentions, if the rest of his community is lacking knowledge and needs to hear the Word of God preached and if he does not preach and teach, while he has the knowledge, then it is rather sinful of him not to pass on this knowledge that he has received from God and help his fellowman. #church/material/sermon

*5 Now I want you all to speak in tongues, but even more to prophesy. The one who prophesies is greater than the one who speaks in tongues, unless someone interprets, so that the church may be built up.*

Speaking in tongues was a sign of those having come to faith in Acts. In 1 Kings even Saul spoke in tongues #todo/opzoeken but that had another reason. That was first of all to withhold Saul from doing anything bad to David and God used His Holy Spirit to change Saul into a prophet. It is not clear whether the language he spoke was anything comprehensible by man, and even so, what were the odds that there was anyone who could speak that human language at that time and that place? Saul was not prophesying in the marketplace in Jerusalem #todo/opzoeken  where there were often people from all over the world. 
But even if no one understood what Saul was saying, his speaking in tongues still built up God's Kingdom because it served a purpose for it prevented him from hurting David. 
In the same way it would be to no avail at all if everyone spoke in tongues except for the people themselves for they would be encouraged and see another miracle. 
Now building up oneself is needed, but only in a limited fashion. One could replace "speaking in tongues" here in v.5 with anything that builds up oneself such as resting, eating, sleeping or even sex. ::But as long as it does not build up the church it does not belong in the church.:: -> #personal/family/familytime/notdone/1corinthians  

*6 Now, brothers, if I come to you speaking in tongues, how will I benefit you unless I bring you some revelation or knowledge or prophecy or teaching? 7 If even lifeless instruments, such as the flute or the harp, do not give distinct notes, how will anyone know what is played?*

If *even* lifeless instruments do not give distinct notes
This means that normally lifeless instruments do provide clarity, but now even they do not. Perhaps this has to do with the instruments mentioned here. A violin or lire #todo/opzoeken/engels can easily give wrong notes, because they depend on where the musician places his fingers. But instruments with discrete sections, such as the guitar and the piano cannot be played wrongly. But if there is no distinction between the frets #todo/opzoeken/engels  or keys, then no one will know what is played, except perhaps by the rythm. 

*8 And if the bugle gives an indistinct sound, who will get ready for battle?*

A bugle on the other hand does not have any keys. Perhaps it has tone, but let us suppose it does not. Even then there is difference between a sound that indicates the sound of victory or that of defeat. Paul also mentions that this is *important*. A bugle, one of the lowest and simplest forms of instruments, can bring the difference between life and death. How much more then can a refined, yet lifeless, instrument bring to mankind? And how much more still can a living instrument bring, such as our tongue and vocal chords? It could bring not only life, but eternal life to people (see v.25). Therefore it is of the utmost importance that what we say is comprehensible. #todo/familytime

*9 So with yourselves, if with your tongue you utter speech that is not intelligible, how will anyone know what is said? For you will be speaking into the air. 10 There are doubtless many different languages in the world, and none is without meaning, 11 but if I do not know the meaning of the language, I will be a foreigner to the speaker and the speaker a foreigner to me. 12 So with yourselves, since you are eager for ::manifestations:: of the Spirit, strive to excel in building up the church.*

Does Paul here mean that if the Corinthians want to see manifestations of the Spirit so badly, they need to strive to excel in building up the church, so that they will see it? In a sense this is true, for in Acts we see that where there is unity and prayer, the Holy Spirit shows His power (cf. Acts 1:24). So if people really want to see the Spirit working, they should strive for unity and part of that is done by using one's gifts to build up each other. 

*13 Therefore, one who speaks in a tongue should pray that he may interpret. 14 For if I pray in a tongue, my spirit prays but my mind is unfruitful.*

Paul says here there is a way of speaking in a tongue that he does not even interpret himself. This of course does not build on up intellectually (v.14), but it can build up one spiritually (v.4). Now Paul is not saying that intellectuality is more important than spirituality. v.19 is speaking of instructing *others*. So when it comes to the other person, one should always choose building up the other over building up oneself, for one should always love another more than he loves himself (#todo/opzoeken Jesus' instructions in Jn 14:33 to love one another as He has loved us, which is definitely more than we love ourselves). So when one is built up spiritually, it is of no use to others, for he is not able to instruct others. But when is built up intellectually, he is able instruct others with what he has learned, so that others will be built up as well. 

*15 What am I to do? I will pray with my spirit, but I will pray with my mind also; I will sing praise with my spirit, but I will sing with my mind also.*

So what should one do? If one is able to pray and sing in tongues, he should also do this in an intelligible language, so that both spirit and mind are stimulated. 

*16 Otherwise, if you give thanks with your spirit, how can anyone in the position of an outsider say “Amen” to your thanksgiving when he does not know what you are saying? 17 For you may be giving thanks well enough, but the other person is not being built up.*

Once again, the goal (here) is to let the unbeliever worship God (v.25) and we want him to say "Amen" to our thanksgiving. In fact, it does not matter how much you thank God, the other person will not be built up by it if he does not understand this. 
Now I have met a Brazillian #todo/opzoeken/engels couple who did not speak Dutch, visiting our church where everything was in Dutch, but they were actually built up by the music, even though it was in a language they did not understand and of a style (traditional Dutch psalms) they were not accustomed to. This was possible, however, because they were already Christians and had the Holy Spirit in them Who speaks and interprets all languages. For outsiders this is not possible and there are no benefits to do this for outsides. #personal/family/worship/notdone

*18 I thank God that I speak in tongues more than all of you. 19 Nevertheless, in church I would rather speak five words with my mind in order to instruct others, than ten thousand words in a tongue.*
::*20 Brothers, do not be children in your thinking. Be infants in evil, but in your thinking be mature.*:: #biblestudy/memorization/nathan/todo 

What do we say then when a church is aimed at believers and not at unbelievers, as it should be? The church is congregation of believers and not of unbelievers but there is always a chance that unbelievers enter the meeting. Should we change all of our ways for this single unbeliever who might occassionally drop by? No, I do not think that is needed. But we should change our ways so that every believer is built up. 
In the example above the Brazillian couple was built up spiritually, but intellectually they were still not built up. They were comforted in the presence of the believers, knowing that in this foreign country they were not alone, but they were among their Christian brothers and sisters. But intellectually, they had not learned anything until there was a translation. This is also why Paul says that we need to be mature in our *thinking* for it is through our *thoughts* that we learn and grow. 
Another reason why Paul says this, is of course because all of the above is logical. It requires not much knowledge to understand that someone needs to hear something in an intelligible language in order to process things in his mind. 

*21 In the Law it is written, “By people of strange tongues and by the lips of foreigners will I speak to this people, and even then they will not listen to me, says the Lord.” 22 Thus tongues are a sign not for believers but for unbelievers, while prophecy is a sign not for unbelievers but for believers. 23 If, therefore, the whole church comes together and all speak in tongues, and outsiders or unbelievers enter, will they not say that you are out of your minds?*

If tongues are a sign for unbelievers (cf. among others Acts 2), why would an unbelievers think it strange if he comes into a church where everyone is speaking in tongues, while it was meant for them? This is said from the assumption that no unbeliever is in the church and everyone understands Hebrews. Why then would they all be speaking in different languages to each other and simultaneously? The latter, speaking simultaneously, would be strange no matter the language, but the former would be strange because one would normally speak the common language, which is Greek. So in other words, the unbeliever would think the Corinthians were out of their minds if they were doing acts toward the unbeliever, while there are no unbelievers present. 
It would be something like a group of adults and mature Christians in a church with only adults singing and dancing and performing children's songs with hand and body movements. Now children tend to think differently than adults do and would rather think this behavior is normal, depending on their experience of visits to other congregations, but an adult walking in would definitely think these people are out of their minds. #todo/familytime

*24 But if all prophesy, and an unbeliever or outsider enters, he is convicted by all, he is called to account by all, 25 the secrets of his heart are disclosed, and so, falling on his face, he will worship God and declare that God is really among you.*

However, if an outsider comes in and sees someone prophesy to another person, this would be normal. On the other hand, if all prophesy that would still seem strange, for then all would still be speaking at the same time. Hence Paul's instructions to speak one by one and three at most. Those were the instructions for speaking in tongues *with* interpretation (v.27), but for prophecy as well (v.29). 

***Orderly Worship***
*26 What then, brothers? When you come together, each one has a hymn, a lesson, a revelation, a tongue, or an interpretation. Let all things be done for building up.*

This is interpreted by some Christians that everyone in church can put forward their request for a song or bring a teaching. However, would this be in contrast with God's demand for order and peace in the service (v.33)? 
First of all we need to realize that v.26 can be interpreted as an observation of what was happening in Corinth, such as 
> "When you come together, you do so and so. But I want to tell you that all things should be done for building up." #composed/bible/1corinthians   
where Paul continues in v.27 with how it should actually be done. 
Now I do realize that it is possible that everyone has a hymn or a lesson and that there could be order by for example waiting until a song has ended until there is silence, and then suggesting the next song or simply by starting singing. Still, if this were the situation in Corinth at the time, it does not mean we should be having congregations this way. Imagine a church as big as Saddleback. How would it be possible for them to have an orderly service in this way? Smaller congregations would be able but would rely on everyone knowing the songs and if there were musical #todo/opzoeken/engels begeleiding that a few person would be able to play all songs requested and projected or at least printed in a booklet. But since there are many publishers of worship music, each person would need to be in the possession of at least three lyrics booklets. 
In practice there are denominations who do music in that way. The brethren do not have their selection of music planned, as far as I know, and do not use any musical instrument. The Mennonites have the latter as well, but I am not certain of the former. In both cases, however, the congregation chooses songs from the booklet they already have or out of their repertoire. But what if one has a song that none of the other members of the congregation knows? Of course one can limit himself in choosing only those known, but it would be a kind of suppression of the spirit—of one's own spirit at the least—and leaving no possibility for the congregation to learn any new songs, unless there is digital projection or an Internet connection to look up the lyrics on one's phone—both options being out of the question for the Mennonite and Amish(Footnote: The Amish actually are of the Mennonite-denomination. #todo/opzoeken relation between the two) for the latter do not even come near modern electric technology, unless it is for work, and the former does not make use of during their service, except for lighting or elevators perhaps. #todo/opzoeken  wanneer dan wel? 
So even if Paul meant that that was the way a congregation should be built up, he most likely would not have meant that all congregations of all times should be built that way. What he did mean, though, was that all things should build up the other. In all cases, order and peace should be present (v.27ff), because this is God's command, and secondly things should be done in the language that everyone understands. 
#todo/idea Peace, order and intelligibility 

*27 If any speak in a tongue, let there be only two or at most three, and each in turn, and let someone interpret. 28 But if there is no one to interpret, let each of them keep silent in church and speak to himself and to God.*

The fact it is known that there is no one to interpret indicates that it has been asked. Most likely one stood up (if he were not already standing) and said he wanted to prophesy in tongues. Then someone, perhaps the service leader, would ask if there was anyone with the gift of interpretation. This means then that some interruption was possible. 
This also means that it is very likely that the order of service mentioned above was indeed as I had described it, namely when one suggested a song he could stand up and suggest it. 

*29 Let two or three prophets speak, and let the others ::weigh:: what is said. 30 If a revelation is made to ::another:: sitting there, let the first be silent.*

Did this mean that as soon as a revelation was given to someone, even while another was still prophesying, the first one had to stop? Probably not, for v.32 says the spirits of prophets are subject to prophets. Paul merely emphasized the sequential character of prophecies as it should be according to the order of church services. 

*31 For you can all prophesy one by one, so that all may learn and all be encouraged, 32 and the spirits of prophets are subject to prophets. 33 For God is not a God of confusion but of peace.*

Most importantly, no matter how important the revelation is, there should be peace. Now a number of prophets and other people might be disappointed when they do not get the chance anymore to say their thing, suggest their hymn etc. but most important is that there is order. v.33 mentions "confusion", while the NIV mentions "disorder" just like the Dutch translations. There is of course a relation between disorder and confusion. It is clear though that God does not want anything in the church to happen disorderly. This does not mean he does not allow for flexibility, but it should all have a goal and it should happen with peace. 
In the same way God created the heavens and the Earth. We see the formed Earth, erosion that happened over thousands of years and mountains that might have come into existence within thousands or less than hundred of years, depending on in which way they were formed, that is through slow tectonic plates moving towards each other or the same process, but by the events during Noah's flood, which happened all within forty days. There might have been a lot of chaos there, and also during erosion there might be a lot of chaos when we see all kinds of pieces of sand being blown by the wind, but in all, there is a somewhat common direction in which these grains of sand are blown and they form beautiful sculptures in the desert. No matter the chaos or forests, in some way we still get forests, mountains and lakes together in perfect harmony. 
The "disorder" in those trees, which are never perfectly aligned, is the flexibility God has and that we should have in church, but the harmony is also what we should have. 

*As in all the churches of the saints, 34 the women should keep silent in the churches. For they are not permitted to speak, but should be in submission, as the Law also says. 35 If there is anything they desire to learn, let them ask their husbands at home. For it is shameful for a woman to speak in church.*

I almost skipped this part, because this topic has been discussed so many times on the one hand, because there seems to be no concensus on this. Also, the Chinese church I was from did not allow female pastors, but only female "evangelists" (where an "evangelist" is not any person who evangelizes, but the title of a certain position in the organization of Chinese congregations. It (傳道) is placed right under pastor, which in turn is under the senior pastor (牧師). Though, or rather because there are no clear statutes (and even if there are clear rules, there is no explanation in them as to why), women went from speakers to evangelists to pastors and even senior pastors. 
This trend seemed and unfortunately still seems to show up 
on the other hand 

*36 Or was it from you that the word of God came? Or are you the only ones it has reached? 37 If anyone thinks that he is a prophet, or spiritual, he should acknowledge that the things I am writing to you are a command of the Lord. 38 If anyone does not recognize this, ::he is not recognized::.*

Paul clearly says here that if anyone does not recognize (or acknowledge) that what he says is from the Lord, then this person is not acknowledged either. This is something that cult leaders often use as well, or leaders of churches who possess cult-like characteristics. 
Paul, however, was the second one to say this, after Jesus Christ. The difference between them and current day church leaders who say this, is that the former's words are part of the Biblical canon while the latter are not. So these days no one can say this anymore. 
How then would the Corinthians have felt when this was said? They could not have trusted anyone who said those words, could they? In fact, the did not. #todo/opzoeken  David Pawson #tags/famouspeople/christian also mentions that the Corinthians did not respond well to this message and only made things worse. Paul then wrote another letter, a harsher one this time, and it was only after that the situation calmed down, after which he wrote an encouraging letter, which is 2 Corinthians. 

*39 So, my brothers, earnestly desire to prophesy, and do not forbid speaking in tongues. 40 But all things should be done decently and in order.*

#biblestudy/devotionals/1corinthians

#todo aan Jan vertellen difference between envy (afgunst) and jealousy
#todo/opzoeken difference between mold and fungus

