# 1 Corinthians 12 (ESV) 
***Spiritual Gifts***
*1 Now concerning spiritual gifts, brothers, I do not want you to be uninformed. 2 You know that when you were pagans you were led astray to mute idols, however you were led. 3 Therefore I want you to understand that no one speaking in the Spirit of God ever says “Jesus is accursed!” and no one can say “Jesus is Lord” except in the Holy Spirit.*

Difference between "cursed" and "accursed". If there is no difference, then the interpretation of the verse saying that Jesus became a curse for us #todo/opzoeken needs to be such that Jesus was not cursed. 
Paul mentions v.3 because he wants us to know how we can distinguish between those who are speaking in the Holy Spirit and those who are not. 
However, we know that there are people who claim to be Christians and say that Jesus was cursed by hanging on the cross and we also know there those who say that Jesus is Lord, even though they are clearly demonic or teaching the prosperity gospel #tags/theology/falsegospel/prosperity (e.g. Joel Osteen and Creflo Dollar #tags/famouspeople ). Even though they might say that Jesus is Lord, we can see by their promises to the people that God will bless them, their excessive way of living and thus also their limited generosity, that it is hard to believe that they are Christians. #biblestudy/questions How then can we know for sure whether someone is Christian or not? We can tell by their fruit. How many people have come to faith because of teachers of the prosperity gospel? There seem to be many who are encouraged. In the Netherlands I know many who have been encouraged by preachers such as Tom de Wal #tags/famouspeople/christian. To me, it is hard to distinguish whether someone is a true Christian or not. God can use these people, just as He has used even the false gospel's Jehova's Witnesses #tags/religion/jehovaswitnesses to bring people to at least look for Christ and then find Him not at true Christian churches. In the same way God could have used the above-mentioned preachers to bring people nearer to God. 
Perhaps it is my lack of knowledge, but I have not heard of any great preacher from those denominations where the prosperity gospel is preached, who has accomplished great fruit throughout the world, who has set up Bible schools, hospitals and other things in underdeveloped countries and sent missionaries and translated Bibles throughout the world. 

*4 Now there are varieties of gifts, but the same Spirit; 5 and there are varieties of service, but the same Lord; 6 and there are varieties of activities, but it is the same God who empowers them all in everyone.*

#todo/opzoeken  oldest version of apostle's creed ever found
The mentioning of the three Persons here is another indication of the existence and common knowledge of the Trinity. There was no discussion about Jesus' existence and His deity, and there was no discussion about Jesus' claims about the Father. Opponents of the Trinitarian God will argue that Jesus was God Himself, but in the form of man, and that He only prayed to the Father as an example for mankind of how to be a righteous person. For if Jesus was the Father Himself, that is if there was not Trinity, then there was no need for Jesus to pray, for God would have then talked to Himself, just like if Jesus tithed, He would be giving it to Himself, so it would be unnecessary. 
Perhaps therefore we see no example of Jesus tithing and this is right. There is no need for Him to give anything to God, for He is God, and there is no need for Him to study Scripture, for He had written this(Footnote: It is unclear whether Jesus had to learn to read and whether He had to read the Bible and memorize it. It could be that even if He never learned how to read, the Spirit instructed Him, just like He spoke to Samuel, but then still there was a process of learning involved. This would imply then that Jesus did not know everything. This is hard to explain, because both scenarios are possible. I am speaking of the following.
1. Jesus willingly submitted Himself to the Father and stripped Himself of some knowledge, such as the date of His second coming, but also of knowledge in general, so that He would have to undergo the tedious process of studying, just like everyone else, in order to have experienced the hard work and effort needed to understand the Scriptures. 
2. Jesus knew everything even before He could speak. He knew He was God, He could read as a baby and understood everything from the Bible even before He ever opened one.

Ad 1. A sidenote here is that some would argue that it is impossible to understand humans perfectly. Even after the big step down for Jesus to descend to Earth in human form, being limited to human brainpower, so to speak, Jesus was still smarter than most people. By definition a person of average intelligence is smarter than 50 percent of the rest and Jesus most definitely was of more than average intelligence. So would this mean then that no one can completely understand others?). Throughout the Bible we see that Jesus knew by heart every passage of Scripture, He knew the answer to every question, He knew every interpretation of the Jews and much more of course, knowing even what their thoughts were and what the future was. Of course, perhaps He had spent His life studying Scripture and therefore knew everything by heart, just like Paul. But we need to note here that Paul was a student and latter teacher perhaps by profession, having studied under Gamaliel, while Jesus claimed He did not have a teacher except for His Father #todo/opzoeken  and 
However, He still  there is a need for Him to 


(such as Jehova's Witnesses #tags/religion/jehovaswitnesses and Mormons #tags/religion/lds) will 

*7 To each is given the manifestation of the Spirit for the common good. 8 For to one is given through the Spirit the utterance of wisdom, and to another the utterance of knowledge according to the same Spirit, 9 to another faith by the same Spirit, to another gifts of healing by the one Spirit, 10 to another the working of miracles, to another prophecy, to another the ability to distinguish between spirits, to another various kinds of tongues, to another the interpretation of tongues. 11 All these are empowered by one and the same Spirit, who ::apportions:: to each one individually as he wills.*

It is clear from this text that the Spirit does not give the same portion to everyone. Just as in the parable of talents—which is or could be an analogy of our own talents or better said, aptitude—we see that not everyone has the same amount, but God reckons with each according to what has been given to him. 
What is also noticeable to me is that it is the *Spirit* who gives different portions. Of course we knew already that it is the Father Who wills and the Lord Jesus Who carries out the work, but in this case, it is the Spirit Who carries out the work, for the "apportioning"—which is work in a sense—is done by the Spirit. Also, it says that the Spirit apportions as *He* wills. We know that there is no difference in will between the three Persons of the Godhead, but it is worth noting that here it is the Spirit Who wills. 

A third thought I have on this text is that up until now, I had always thought of the working process of the Trinity as the Father Who wills, the Son carrying this out through the power given by the Holy Spirit. Now, however, I see that there is also power flowing not to Christ, but to us, first of all, as if by way of a pipeline, having a constant pressure of energy. Second of all, though, the Holy Spirit does not only provide power, but also spiritual gifts, which are like tools. So it would be as if an energy source provided both the power and the tool itself, which is impossible. But then again, we know that the Holy Spirit is not an energy source, but He is God Himself. 
#todo/opzoeken Power Rangers and Green Lantern example #personal/family/familytime/notdone/1corinthians

***One Body with Many Members***
*12 For just as the body is one and has many members, and all the members of the body, though many, are one body, so it is with Christ. 13 For in one Spirit we were all baptized into one body—Jews or Greeks, slaves or free—and all were made to drink of one Spirit.*

This is different from Hebrews 6 where the people *tasted* of the Holy Spirit instead of drinking from it. Here, Paul is speaking about Christians whereas in Hebrews the author is most likely not speaking to Christians. David Pawsoon #church/sermons/@davidpawson #tags/famouspeople/christian used Hebrews 6 as an argument against the doctrine of *Once Saved, Always Saved* #biblestudy/theology/calvinism/osas, but John MacArthur #church/sermons/@johnmacarthur explained it as I have done here. 

*14 For the body does not consist of one member but of many. 15 If the foot should say, “Because I am not a hand, I do not belong to the body,” that would not make it any less a part of the body.*

It does not matter what this part says, it does not change the fact that it is part of the body and it does not change its worth. However, if he should decide not to work this will impact the body and himself eventually. The foot that does not move the body forward will cause the body not to be at the place to obtain food and eventually all members will perish. 
There is not a single part of the body that can refuse to cooperate. Perhaps the eyes and the ears can refuse to work, for the rest of the body would still find their way to the food, provided that it is known where the food was, but not if the body was told where the food was and that the eye had to look for it. #personal/family/familytime/done/1corinthians

*16 And if the ear should say, “Because I am not an eye, I do not belong to the body,” that would not make it any less a part of the body. 17 If the whole body were an eye, where would be the sense of hearing? If the whole body were an ear, where would be the sense of smell? 18 But as it is, God arranged the members in the body, each one of them, as he chose. 19 If all were a single member, where would the body be? 20 As it is, there are many parts, yet one body.*

I am wondering what the word "arranged" means here. It probably has to do with the "apportioning" mentioned previously, meaning that God gave every member a different gift or function and a different portion or capacity if you will. If two people can read, one can read better than the other, and God willed it this way. But here the emphasis is not on the capacity, but on the function. 
This is logical, just like in the army, which is also called the corps (*corpus* means "body" in Latin) or in any other *bodily* entity, such as companies, organizations and especially the church, as it is even *named* the body of Christ. 
However, would this not mean that if God has the possibility to make everyone a brain, he intentionally makes some a foot? Companies are built the way they are because people have been created this way. Entrepreneurs see no other way but to use the skills there are in the market—and in the right proportions as well!—and use these to build up their company and it happens to be fitting for everyone(Footnote: Actually, it does not fit everyone, because some might have not finished school because of external reasons, such as laziness, bad influence of friends or financial or other circumstantial reason. When these people perform low-paid manual labor, they are often not incentivized enough and will become a source of complaints.).
What would have happened if God had created more leaders than followers, and more intelligent people than strong ones. We would then have a lot of people smart enough to think of better infrastructures but no one to build them. But the proportion of gifts is spread in the exactly correct, for God makes no mistakes. 
However, in the congregation of Christ the process is implemented even better than that. Whereas in companies sometimes a person needs to be let go of, because there is no need for him anymore when there enough people with the same skill he has, this problem never occurs in a congregation. God never sends anyone to a local congregation when this person cannot be used there anymore. He will not send someone with the gift of evangelization to a congregation that has more than enough missionaries and too few other workers. God will either send someone with multiple gifts so he can help wherever necessary or He will provide an opportunity for this person to be of help. 
The Church is a living organism, if you will, and each member, that is the local congregations, can adapt itself, which is the meaning of putting new wine in new bags. Unfortunately this does not always happen. Many people are "jobless" #todo/opzoeken/engels  difference between werkloos en werkeloos in their congregations and many "churches", such as the Church of England, the Roman-Catholic churches and orthodox churches all the way up to Reformed, baptist and even present-day denominations, still do not know how to adapt themselves for the sake of each member of the body, here meaning each believer or each congregational member and therefore are less effective than congregations that *do* adapt themselves. 
The question remains then what happens when someone leaves the church, but as is discussed above, the Body of Christ is dynamic. It works through supernatural powers and the Holy Spirit can imbue any power on anyone, and the gifts are apportioned according to needs, meaning that perhaps when a person leaves a congregation his gift was also not needed anyone or would not be needed anymore in the near future. Lastly, it is possible that people from other local congregations help out this church in need. 

*21 The eye cannot say to the hand, “I have no need of you,” nor again the head to the feet, “I have no need of you.” 22 On the contrary, the parts of the body that ::seem:: to be weaker are indispensable, 23 and on those parts of the body that ::we think:: less honorable we ::bestow:: the greater honor, and our unpresentable parts are treated with greater ::modesty::, 24 which our more presentable parts do not ::require::.*

I need to reconsider whether Paul is speaking of the current situation (in Corinth) or the desired situation. When he speaks of bestowing greater honor, is he saying that we are doing that naturally or that we *should* do that? The former would not make any sense, for why would anyone bestow great honor on a body member or person in the church of whom he thinks less honorable? So we should assume the latter then that this is the desired situation. 
What then does it mean when something is treated with greater modesty? When someone is modest he is not dressed #todo/opzoeken/engels extravagant or he does not perform in such a way to attract attention. Perhaps rather yet he, and usually a she, would do away with anything that could lead to that. Some modest women in church therefore do not wear make-up or braid #todo/opzoeken/engels opmaken their hair. Other modest women do wear make-up or make-up their hair, but only when it is not too noticeable. 
The reason for wearing make-up is to cover up any imperfectheden #todo/opzoeken/engels #todo/opzoeken/nederlands or to boast, but in the case of modest women it is always the former. It could even be the figurative covering up of insecurities that one has about one's looks—also, usually in the case of women. These women have "unpresentable parts" such as acne or other forms of skin problems, wrinkles, grey hair—or perhaps they think their eyes are too small, nose to flat, lips not full enough, etc.—they cover these up with make-up so that they become presentable. 
But what does it mean to treat someone with great modesty? It does not mean that that person should be modest, but that the person treating that someone should be modest so that the other person gets more honor. 
For example, if I were to stand next to a groom and I wanted to give him honor, I would not dress myself in a better way than the groom himself. The same goes for women, although some women (in my previous church) either had never learned this or were not modest but out for honor, even at the expense of the bride. #personal/family/familytime/done/1corinthians 
This example, however, can only be applied when this concerns at least two persons. It would not make sense with the previous example I gave on unpresentable facial parts. In that case it would be better to give these parts honor directly instead of making other parts more modest.  Also, Paul is referring to persons in the church here and using the bodily members as an example, so it would be correct to apply this to human relationships. 
The last part would then entail that more presentable persons in the church do not need to be treted with greater modesty. We do not need to give greater honor to our elders by being *more* modest ourselves. Of course we need to be modest *of* ourselves already, regardless of who is around us, but we do not need to be *extra* modest for presentable people, such as worship leaders and other more known people in the church. 
This would not contradict 1 Timothy 5:17, which speaks of giving elders double honor, for this honor is in material form. These people are alredy not self-centered by living a life of servanthood for Christ and others, receiving a lower wage than they probably would have in a secular career and if they also teach from the Bible, they not only spend extra time but are also under greater pressure #todo/opzoeken references of greater accountability for teachers of the Word. 

*But God has so ::composed:: the body, giving greater honor to the part that ::lacked:: it, 25 ::that:: there may be no division in the body, but that the members may have the same care for one another. 26 If one member suffers, all suffer together; if one member is honored, all rejoice together.*

God composed the body in such a way and He had in mind how certain people in certain functions needed to be treated so that they would receive greater honor. My thought is that the elderly who have become experienced prayer lives and pray regularly for the congregation, that they would get honor when younger people would visit them and help them in their household. Unfortunately this is not the case in practice. 
I do not see how a composition would give greater honor to the parts that lack it. In a physical body I can see that those things on the outside obtain more honor, such as the head as opposed to the stomach or the feet. Did God compose the body in such a way because heads need more honor? What does v.23 then mean? It meant that we need to take greater care of our feet, our armpits and internal organs. These are our important parts, though we think of them as weaker. 
What then needs to get more honor, the head because it needs it, or the "weaker" parts, such as feet? The answer is "both". They both need to *receive* the same honor, but *receiving* the same honor does not that we have to *give* the same honor to both parts. Because the head is already visible to everyone, it already receives honor naturally, and we only need to *give* it a little, but because the weaker parts are hidden they do not naturally receive the honor they need, and so we need to *give* it to them. 
In this way everyone receives the right *amount* of honor he needs. Moreover, everyone receives the *type* of honor he needs, for a weaker part would not want to be on stage and receive that kind of honor, and a head would not want to be unknown by everyone and only receive honor behind closed doors. 
It is for a reason that Paul has used the word "lacked" here. I assume that that is because heads have a natural inclination to lack honor. Perhaps that is the reason why they were ambitious and volunteered for a specific role in church. People like Rick Warren #tags/famouspeople/christian, who are clearly leaders of the church, receive much attention but are also prone to emotional weaknesses. These types of people need and love attention. Mark Gungor #tags/famouspeople/christian explained this very well in his marriage course *Laugh your way to a happy marriage* #todo/opzoeken correcte naam? 
So understand that heads receive attention for a reason. They lack honor. 

*27 Now you are the body of Christ and individually members of it. 28 And God has appointed in the church first apostles, second prophets, third teachers, then miracles, then gifts of healing, helping, administrating, and various kinds of tongues. 29 Are all apostles? Are all prophets? Are all teachers? Do all work miracles? 30 Do all possess gifts of healing? Do all speak with tongues? Do all interpret? 31 But earnestly desire the higher gifts.*
*And I will show you a still more excellent way.*

The interpretation I received last week from a preacher named Chris Verhage was that v.31 should be translated as #composed/bible/1corinthians
> But you earnestly desire the "higher" gifts.  
This is more in line with the context of the rest of this first letter to the Corinthians, for Paul mentioned that there is no higher gift. As each member needs the other, so each gift is used to build up the other and not one gift can be lacking. 
v.28 does mention a certain order though, clearly indicating that the first gift of apostleship is greater than that of the second, etc. However, it is also clear that this only goes on until the third gift, after which he mentions a number of gifts in a row. This could mean that the first three gifts are necessary to start any congregation. If the gift of being an apostle means something like that of a missionary and more specific a church planter (for there are many types of missionaries, also those who help out people but who do not plant church, such as the people of Mercy Ships, Open Doors, Woord en Daad and *Compassion*) then it is logical that someone needs to plant the church—and usually this is someone who does not remain in the church, for he has this gift and will use it to plant churches elsewhere—and others who will receive the Word from God and preach or prophesy this and still others who will teach it. 
The gift of apostleship entails that the apostle is able to prophesy and preach and teach as well, for who else could do this in the beginning, when he started this church by himself? In the same way some gifts are accompanied by others, such as that of pastors (see Ephesians 4:11, "shepherds and teachers") who also need to be teachers, for no pastor can give correct pastoral care if he cannot also teach the pastored person wisdom. 

What does prophesy mean then? We do not see prophets like Moses or Noah in the New Testament, but we do see people who clearly know the will of God. We see this in Acts but also in many epistles, for example, when questions arise on how to deal with difficult questions. Those questions were not answered by the Gospels or the Old Testament, but needed a supernatural revelation from God. The leaders of the church in those times therefore needed prophecies 

Lastly, is there reason why Paul names the first three gifts of v.28 as persons or ministries and the rest as gifts per se? Paul is not naming a list of gifts here, but he starts his line with "God has appointed *in the church*". So this means the things he mentions next are what is needed in the church, which is these *positions*. There could be a prophet and a teacher, but if he is not *positioned* as a teacher, that is committed to his work and do his work on a regular basis, the church cannot thrive. There needs to be a teaching pastor *stationed* in the church as well as other functions. 

#biblestudy/devotionals/1corinthians
