# 1 Corinthians 9 (ESV) 
***Paul Surrenders His Rights***
*1 Am I not free? Am I not an apostle? Have I not seen Jesus our Lord? Are not you my workmanship in the Lord? 2 If to others I am not an apostle, at least I am to you, for you are the seal of my apostleship in the Lord.*

This seems to be quite a jump from one topic to another. In the previous chapter Paul spoke of eating food offered to idols, but in this chapter about a worker deserving to be paid. His bridge here is that he ended the last chapter with the surrendering of his right to eat meat if it was needed, and he continues in this chapter by emphasizing that he *has rights* as well. 

*3 This is my defense to those who would examine me. 4 Do we not have the right to eat and drink? 5 Do we not have the right to take along a believing wife, as do the other apostles and the brothers of the Lord and Cephas? 6 Or is it only Barnabas and I who have no right to refrain from working for a living? 7 Who serves as a soldier at his own expense? Who plants a vineyard without eating any of its fruit? Or who tends a flock without getting some of the milk?*
*8 Do I say these things on human authority? Does not the Law say the same? 9 For it is written in the Law of Moses, “You shall not muzzle an ox when it treads out the grain.” Is it for oxen that God is concerned? 10 Does he not certainly speak for our sake? It was written for our sake, because the plowman should plow in hope and the thresher thresh in hope of sharing in the crop. 11 If we have sown spiritual things among you, is it too much if we reap material things from you? 12 If others share this rightful claim on you, do not we even more?*
*Nevertheless, we have not made use of this right, but we endure anything rather than put an obstacle in the way of the gospel of Christ. 13 Do you not know that those who are employed in the temple service get their food from the temple, and those who serve at the altar share in the sacrificial offerings? 14 In the same way, the Lord commanded that those who proclaim the gospel should get their living by the gospel.*

It seems like Paul is providing the same argument multiple times, applied in different situations. Is this because this principle is so difficult to grasp that he needs to provide three examples and spend twelve verses on this? Or does he mean different things by these?
There seems to be a logical build-up of arguments leading to the final argument, which is that Paul and other evangelists should be paid for their work and for spreading the Gospel. It is not as if he wants to bring this carefully and therefore spends many words on this, because he starts with that argument in the very first verse. So would it be a statement he puts forward first, and then defends this statement with arguments? v.3 shows that this is true because Paul call it his defense. But the question remains, why would he have to defend himself concerning such a trivial point? I do not see why this statement would require so many arguments and examples as the point is clear and people I know have never made any issue of paying someone who works, be it in the secular or spiritual #todo/opzoeken/engels area.
But perhaps that is exactly the point. No one in Corinth refused to pay any worker. Logic tells us so, the Law of Moses confirmed this. Adding to that, people who worked in or for the church, which perhaps is being perceived as work that is less hard and also pays less(Footnote: The Levites for example did not have much income, because they only received a tenth of what the people gave, which was mostly in the form of food, and thus could spoil as well, and had to give a tenth of that to the priests. They were provided for sufficiently to provide in their family's basic needs. In the same way in the Netherlands at least senior pasters or reverends are also paid according to their needs which often comprises a two times minimum wage, which is in stark contrast with the number of hours they work, their academic education and sometimes their effort as well.). Now Paul did *both* of that. #todo/nogaftemaken So if anyone deserved money, it would be he. 

*15 But I have made no use of any of these rights, nor am I writing these things to secure any such provision. For I would rather die than have anyone ::deprive me of my ground for boasting::.*

Paul is boasting here of the fact that he does not receive anything for his work in church planting and spreading the Gospel. He explicitly says he is not saying all of this (including all the verses up to this one) because he wants to receive income, for he would not want to be deprived of the reason for boasting. That sounds very proud, for a Christian should not boast for any reason no matter how great the sacrifice, and now it *seems* that Paul even says that he prefers dying over not being able to boast. 
The truth is that he is not fond of boasting, but he is very attached to his *ground* for boasting. What then is this ground? It is that he can present the gospel free of charge. Why is this ground important? It is important because he does not use his full rights then, which is to be paid according to his work and to live comfortably. What does it matter whether he uses his full rights or not? When he does not use his full rights he might save a few people more for Christ. 
Paul explains this through his servanthood. It is logical that more people will benefit if Paul does not claim his rights to be paid, for example because more money would then be available to be used in the kingdom. Also when Paul gives up his comfortability and lives like a Jew, that is with stricter rules, or even lives with those he does not feel comfortable at all, that is those outside of the law, then in that way as well he might be able to win some. #church/material/sermon So in fact he was saying that he rather died than to be deprived of this possibility to bring the Gospel to more people. 

*16 For if I preach the gospel, that gives me no ground for boasting. For necessity is laid upon me. Woe to me if I do not preach the gospel! 17 For if I do this of my own will, I have a reward, but if not of my own will, ::I am still entrusted with a stewardship.::*

Note that Paul explicitly mentions that preaching the gospel is no ground for boasting. I must confess that I feel proud whenever I tell a person of my experiences of spreading the gospel on the streets, even though I have done that only a few times. Still, evangelizing is necessary and if I were not to do this—woe to me! What I have done is nothing compared to Paul's works. He did this every day, he did this out of his own will and because of his love for others. I have none of that and I have less results from it as well. 

Even if we do not preach the gospel out of our own will, we *still* need to do this because of our *stewardship* over it. If we take care of our children out of our own will, we will be rewarded by God because we are doing something good. But even if we do not want to, we still need to do it, because we have a stewardship over our children. 
If anyone in a church is not involved with preaching the gospel—and I do not mean evangelizing merely by living in a way Christ does—that too, of course, is *important*, but spreading the word is *necessary*—they are not aware of the stewardship of the gospel they have been entrusted with. 
#personal/family/familytime/done/1corinthians


*18 What then is my reward? That in my preaching I may present the gospel free of charge, so as not to make full use of my right in the gospel.*

What is Paul's reward for preaching the gospel of his own will (v.17)? He does not actually answer this question, because simply not making full use of his right in the gospel is not a purpose or end-goal. See  notes on v.15 for the answer. 

*19 For though I am free from all, I have made myself a servant to all, that I might win more of them. 20 To the Jews I became as a Jew, in order to win Jews. To those under the law I became as one under the law (though not being myself under the law) that I might win those under the law. 21 To those outside the law I became as one outside the law (not being outside the law of God but under the law of Christ) that I might win those outside the law. 22 To the weak I became weak, that I might win the weak. I have become all things to all people, that by all means I might save some. 23 I do it all for the sake of the gospel, that I may share with them in its blessings.*

This is an interesting way of phrasing things. Usually when someone says that he wants to share with you in your blessings, it means that he wants some of that blessing you have, because he has none himself. But this time it is the other way around, for Paul is the one who has these blessings and he wants others to be able to share in it. 
How far is this from the love that the world knows! Paul has something that others do not have, a love from the Father and gifts from the Holy Spirit, and he is willing to die and rather dies than that his possibility to reach out to a few more is removed from him, only for the single reason that he wants to share these blessings with them. It is like someone who has the best chocolate in the world and then says: "I had rather die than that I cannot share this chocolate with people." But in this case the sharing itself would not the main purpose, but the gratitude for the one who gave him this best chocolate for free. He would know the love of this chocolatemaker for other people and so—reflecting this love—he would spread the good news of this chocolate to others. #stories/bible/idea #todo/familytime

*24 Do you not know that in a race all the runners run, but only one receives the prize? So run that you may obtain it. 25 Every athlete exercises self-control in all things. They do it to receive a perishable wreath, but we an imperishable. 26 So I do not run aimlessly; I do not box as one beating the air.*

The reason Christians need to live as if they are fighting a war or training for a competition, even better, running the race itself, is not because our spiritual battle is *like* that of war, but because it is even far more than that. It is more important to our own lives, to that of others it is a battle that is much more difficult and requires much more training. Where Olympic athletes train four to eight hours a day, Christians need to train their bodies and spirit all day long. Where bodybuilders or people who train physically have a day off each week, and every month perhaps a so-called "sinning day" so they are allowed to eat everything they want, Christian do not have any day off all of their lives. Where people train certain muscle groups every other day, so as not to overexert them, we train everything every day. 
It is not we who come with a training schedule but God does. He knows our bodies better than trainers know that of their athletes. He will not overexert us, but if it happens, He will provide strength or a way out (1 Corinthians 10:13). Unlike trainers, however, who are not certain of their methods, God knows for sure what is best for us and can get more out of us than what is in us, which is physically impossible with any sport, but with God this is possible, because He can provide us with strength from His Holy Spirit. 
Gladys Aylward for example walked many miles from Russia to China and then within China thousands #todo/opzoeken of miles, along with children, fleeing from Japanese bombs, being rejected at many villages and without food for #todo/opzoeken how many? days. 
Why all of this? It is because the reward is infinitely greater. Think about it: the work and effort are a finite multiple of that of a secular one, but the reward is infinitely many more times than any glory any person can ever obtain on Earth. 
The reason why politicians these days choose the dark side, that is siding with the New World Order, implementing the Great Reset through embellishing fear through COVID-19 and implementing ever more restrictions in order to control people more, is not because of money. These people know that money—and even power—is limited on Earth. They know that there is a power in the afterworld that gives them—at least they think so—infinitely more power and satisfaction. They might have felt something when they crossed the lines of sinning (cf. 1 John 5:16-17, the sin that leads to death) and gave themselves up to Satanic rituals(Footnote: The opening of the Gothard tunnel in Switzerland was done with bizarre occult rites and dances. Not only there, but everywhere we see men (or women) in power, we see Satanic rituals: in the world of finance (see for example Ronald Bernard's testimony) and in extreme sexual abuse of children.). Another possibility is that these politicians and policymakers are not even conscious of their actions anymore and are merely operating as puppets for Satan, in which case they are not doing this for a reward. 

*27 ::But I discipline my body:: and keep it under control, lest after preaching to others I myself should be disqualified.*



#todo/opzoeken  testen op kinderen en zwangere vrouwen. Niet officieel gedaan in Randomized Control Trial, maar volgens FDA is het nu wel toegestaan kinderen en zwangeren in te enten. 

#biblestudy/devotionals/1corinthians