# 1 Corinthians 3 (ESV) 
***Divisions in the Church***
*1 But I, brothers, could not address you as spiritual people, but as people of the flesh, as infants in Christ.*

My personal conclusion would be that these people are not Christians. In Chapter 2 Paul came to preach the Gospel to them, but not the spiritual wisdom, which was for the mature or completed (v.6). Here, confirming this, Paul says that the people of Corinth are infants in Christ. 
In my view one is either Christian or not. 1 Corinthians 6:11,20 say that these people have been washed and paid for, which is clearly a sign of their salvation. However, I would argue that this is what we tell our congregation as well, because some in the congregation have actually been saved and those who are not we cannot distinguish. So we rather group the whole as being saved and motivate them in this way to live a good life—knowing that those who have been saved, will heed the warning—than telling the whole group that it is not sure that they have been saved. 
Paul is not like us, especially not in writing this specific letter which was spiritually inspired. Paul could have made mistakes, but this letter would not included in the Biblical canon if it had any. So it would be fair to say that Paul actually means that all or most of the addressed people in Corinth are Christians (of course there can always be a few exceptions, but in general the congregation behaved a certain way, and Paul saw that they had all been saved). 
All of this would contradict my first paragraph and I had rather be wrong than Paul, but it seems like this also contradicts my arguments. This can only be harmonized by concluding first that the term *babes in Christ* refers to actual Christians and that the terms "mature" and "Christian" are not mutually inclusive, that is every "mature spiritual person" is a Christian, but not every Christian can be called "mature" or "completed." Of course this would not go against basic Christian doctrine. All have still been completed *in Christ*, but not in the flesh. 

*2 I fed you with milk, not solid food, for you were not ready for it. And even now you are not yet ready, 3 for you are still of the flesh. For while there is jealousy and strife among you, are you not of the flesh and behaving only in a human way? 4 For when one says, “I follow Paul,” and another, “I follow Apollos,” are you not being merely human?*

Still, we are assuming that these words are meant for Christians, but we see strife among the believers, and these are not people who just started to believe, but they should have been mature by now according to Paul himself (v.2). If we apply this logic, then the Evangelical Christians' definition of fleshly Christian would be correct, which is that one is Christian but still needs time to grow into maturity. Sometimes, however, this growth stagnates. 
There is another theory—I do not know to which group this belongs, but I share the same view—and that is that a Christian will always grow as long as he is planted in the right water. 
To illustrate this: A Christian should always bear fruit, because he is merely a vessel and the water that is in the fruit has come from what entered through its roots. A Christian is planted in living water from the Spirit and so his fruit is from the Spirit as well. If a person does not bear fruit, this can only mean that the water he is planted in is not from the Spirit. 
Should this theory be changed? Should we say that, for example, the ground in which the tree is planted needs to be good as well and that the ground, if contaminated could influence the growth of the fruit?
This contamination would in this case be their worldly Greek thinking, which was very common in Corinth, by comparing oneself with others and always striving to be the best. Greek philosophers were famous for this and Socrates, though being humble, still sought to provide answers better than other fellow philopsophers such as described in his student Plato's book #tags/books called *Symposium*. 
Still, to me this illustration is hard to accept. I would have expected that a person changed by Christ, no matter how occult or immoral his environment is, be it Corinth or Hippo, one would still be able to rise above all the temptation (cf. 1 Corinthians 10:13), just like Augustine of Hippo #tags/famouspeople/christian did. #biblestudy/questions

*5 What then is Apollos? What is Paul? Servants through whom you believed, as the Lord assigned to each. 6 I planted, Apollos watered, but God gave the growth. 7 So neither he who plants nor he who waters is anything, but only God who gives the growth. 8 He who plants and he who waters are one, and each will receive his wages according to his labor. 9 For we are God's fellow workers. You are God's field, God's building.*
*10 According to the grace of God given to me, like a skilled master builder I laid a foundation, and someone else is building upon it. Let each one take care how he builds upon it. 11 For no one can lay a foundation other than that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ.*

Paul seems to be contradicting himself here when he says he laid a foundation but then says that no one can lay a foundation. Most likely he is speaking of two separate things. The latter foundation is the one that is already laid, which can only be laid by Jesus Christ through the work He has done on the cross, but the former foundation is about Paul's work by founding congregations, which has done in throughout Asia Minor, Galatia and Greece.

*12 Now if anyone builds on the foundation with gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, straw— 13 each one's work will become manifest, for the Day will disclose it, because it will be revealed by fire, and the fire will test what sort of work each one has done. 14 If the work that anyone has built on the foundation survives, he will receive a reward. 15 If anyone's work is burned up, he will suffer loss, though he himself will be saved, but only as through fire.*

Does the "loss" here refer to a punishment or to missing out on the reward? If this person is saved, then there could be no punishment for these things are absent in heaven and on the New Earth. 

*16 Do you not know that you are God's temple and that God's Spirit dwells in you? 17 If anyone destroys God's temple, God will destroy him. For God's temple is holy, and you are that temple.*

This does not only refer to people who take bad care of their own body, but also to those who hurt other people's bodies. Bad advice from doctors, people who tattoo others, doctors who perform abortions, doctors who vaccinate people with the so-called anti-corona vaccine, doctors who do plastic surgery for the wrong reasons, doctors who perform sex change surgeries, and of course criminals and all others who physically hurt others (although these doctors are among the criminals). 
It is peculiar to see how many (types of) doctors are part of this group, even though doctors are supposed to be protecting the people. This world is going against God's Law, even though we knew that already from many places in the Bible (e.g. Romans 1:20) in moral ways, but also in the field of psychology, e.g. that children should not be punished (physically) while Proverbs #todo/opzoeken  says that the father who loves his son will do so, finance (to spend and save your money wisely, and spend it rather on immaterial things, cf. with materialism of this world) and most importantly, and alas, most frequent as well, in worship, where people worship the created such as people (kings and pop and movie stars), idols (statues such as in Catholicism and Buddhism), animals and even materials (money, technological gadgets), instead of the Creator Himself.
Self-mutilation has become a popular thing these days. I am not speaking of cutting oneself, although that too is rising (although I do not have any statistics of that), but I am speaking of tattoos, plastic surgery and piercings. Many people put piercings where these do not belong, such as through their eyebrows, nipples and even through their glans or clitoris. 

*18 Let no one deceive himself. If anyone among you thinks that he is wise in this age, let him become a fool that he may become wise. 19 For the wisdom of this world is folly with God. For it is written, “He catches the wise in their craftiness,” 20 and again, “The Lord knows the thoughts of the wise, that they are futile.”*

Spiritual wisdom is very mysterious. It is not material and can not be understood in terms of logic; even the atoms of this world still have some kind of logic. But spiritual wisdom can only be understood when one becomes a fool in this world. With conventional wisdom God's wisdom is not obtained. 
Why would God have done this? The wise, unfortunately, have more intellect, but also more evil in them. Throughout history we see that it is always the wise who have been crafty. Even in the Trojan War #tags/historic events#, whether this happened for real or not, King Agamemnon used the kidnap of his brother's wife, Helen, as an excuse to invade Troy to obtain its wealth. We do not even need to speak of all wars before and after the two World Wars where crafty people used these wars as a gain for themselves and inflicted harm to many people. 
But are there no wise people with good hearts, one might ask. Yes, there are. But these too, need to undo their way of thinking which they have learned through their education. It is like a pathway with a Y-shaped crossroads. When one has taken the wrong path, he cannot reach his destination without going back first to that crossroads. Paul, for example, had to go back to that crossroads, an event shown in his life by his approximate isolation for three years after his conversion, to undo his learning and renew his mind from all Jewish *tradition* and gentile teaching (cf. Romans 12:2). 
In Dutch there is a Christian company that makes and prints striking or sarcastic Christian one-liners called *Visje*. One of their lines is
> Hoe ver je ook van God verwijderd bent, Hij is altijd maar één stap van je vandaan.  
which means "No matter how far you are from God, He is only one step away from you. This is true, in the sense that one needs to take only one step of conversion and faith in Jesus Christ in order to become His child. It is like when one is walking in the wrong direction, no matter how far he has walked, he needs only to turn once to be in the right direction. But still, this does not shorten the distance to reach his target. 
People who have lived all of their lives as enemies of God have obtained many bad habits. As soon as they become Christians, which takes only one step of faith, they need to get rid of all of their bad habits which could take a while. In the same way the wise need to go back all the way on the path of worldly wisdom to when they were mere fools, in order to then take the right path to spiritual wisdom. #church/material/sermon

*21 So let no one boast in men. For all things are yours, 22 whether Paul or Apollos or Cephas or the world or life or death or the present or the future—all are yours, 23 and you are Christ's, and Christ is God's.*
 
#biblestudy/devotionals/1corinthians