# 1 Corinthians 7 (ESV) 
***Principles for Marriage***
*1 Now concerning the matters about which you wrote: “It is good for a man not to have sexual relations with a woman.” 2 But because of the temptation to sexual immorality, each man should have his own wife and each woman her own husband. 3 The husband should give to his wife her conjugal rights, and likewise the wife to her husband. 4 For the wife does not have authority over her own body, but the husband does. Likewise the husband does not have authority over his own body, but the wife does.*

The interpretation of this part is generally the same among all denominations. I have never heard any other interpretation than the face value of this part. Which provides peace of mind on the one hand, knowing that different churches will not argue about this point. On the other hand, however, many people, mostly women, still have problems with and of the many "Christian" men who divorce or commit adultery, reason number one is because of a lack of sex(Footnote: For more reasons, see the #tags/books book *His Needs, Her Needs* by Willard F. Harly.) 
Paul commands men and women to give their body to each other, but women—for whom this is much more difficult, granted—refuse to incorporate this command in their lifestyle. Of course there is a reason behind this, which is that the woman also has conjugal rights, which is to be loved and shown affection among others, and that the husband is not harsh with her (cf. Ephesians 5:25, 1 Peter 3:7, Col 3:18f), which in reality is often the case and reason for the woman to refuse intercourse with her husband. It is not as easy to say that when the woman does not refuse, the man will also become more gentle and loving, for in practice we see that this also is not the case. But I do believe that on the whole, if the woman not only obeys God in this field of sexual intercourse, but also in humility, for example in her materialism and clothing (1 Peter 3:3, 1 Timothy 2:9), and in her diligence (Proverbs 31:13ff) then the husband would surely appreciate her more and more. 
I have seen situations where the wife does everything the husband wants and providing for everything he needs, taking care of the household and the children, but still showing a lack of respect, which is reflected in the way the children respect the father. The husband sees or feels this and will reciprocate his feelings towards the children and the wife. 

*5 Do not deprive one another, except perhaps by agreement for a limited time, that you may devote yourselves to prayer; but then come together again, so that Satan may not tempt you because of your lack of self-control.*

Paul does not state here that we should do this "just in case" one might have a lack of self-control, but he states that we *have* this lack. This is simply a fact, both for the man on the field of his sexual desires, as well as for the woman on the field of expressing her emotions. 
Note also that the "perhaps" in verse v.5 indicates that not in all cases this agreement is valid, even when one (says he) wants to devote himself to prayer. 
In the movie #tags/movies *As it is in Heaven*, an Academy Award®-nominee for Best Foreign Picture, there was a priest or pastor (I do not know the denomination) who refused to have sex with his wife because of his view on sex as unholy. His motives were to keep himself clean for God, but because he was not able to control himeslf, he watched porn magazines to vent out his lusts. If he had understood this part of the Bible, he would have gone to his wife, but he did not, and so the Satan was able to tempt him. 

*6 Now as a concession, not a command, I say this. 7 I wish that all were as I myself am. But each has his own gift from God, one of one kind and one of another.*

#biblestudy/questions Would v.7 mean that each person has two gifts or two kinds of gifts? Or is Paul referring to two persons where *one* (person) has a gift of one kind and another (person) has another kind of gift. Let me put up front that I do not have the answer to this question. There is a general theory among Christians that anyone who has the Holy Spirit has at least one spiritual gift, for we need to serve God with our talents, but if we have none, this would be difficult. Does everyone have a talent then, one might ask? This depends on the definition of a "talent". 
Let us define a talent as something that a person is able to do. A person can play football, draw, read and write, do mathematics and so on, and all of these things can be done on a certain level. That fact one is able to *do* these is called a talent. So people could easily have multiple talents, but not be very *proficient* at these. In this sense skills and talent can be used interchangeably. There is also the term "gifted". When one is gifted he is able to increase his proficiency for this talent much faster than others would. 
Now most people learn skills and talents in school or at home, but some, who have been abused, who never went to school or have had anyone teaching them, hardly have any talents. So they would not have any talents which would be useful to serve the kingdom of God c.q. the local church. "Well, everyone could clean the church and everyone could welcome others right?" That is true, but let us consider these later. 
So supposing that a person cannot serve the church because of his lack of talents, how then would he be able to serve God? For this reason God has given everyone gifts when they became His children. Some gifts are dependent on physical abilities. One who cannot speak for example will most likely not get the gift of singing, which could be very sadistic of God—with all respect and humility, for I do not pretend to know God's ways— if He were to do so. It would be like someone who is not able to do anything and not having any skills, and then God gives this person only one gift, the gift of music, but because he is deaf or mute, he would not be able to use this gift. 
Other gifts, however, are not dependent on physical abilities. This could be a task for someone in the welcoming team or someone who is willing to listen to other people's feelings or someone who is willing to help other people with simple tasks in the household. But there would always need to be something in a person to become willing to do this, for an underlying assumption is that the gift will be intricately connected with the Christians passion. For why would God give a person a gift that he would not like to use? Would God want the Christian to use his gift without joy and pleasure? It could be that God wants the convert to learn how to find joy in his new gift, but eventually the person would be joyful, so that would still be God's purpose. 

Now as for the tasks that are seen as less complicated, such as cleaning, pastoral care and welcoming, these require a change of character. Some are *willing* to work, others are willing to listen and are able to empathize with others, still others are perhaps not very able at skills needed for the church, but their willingness to give money or pray is greater than others. So each has a gift, and if they do not, something would be wrong in their relationship with God, if they are Christians at all.

*8 To the unmarried and the widows I say that it is good for them to remain single, as I am. 9 But if they cannot exercise self-control, they should marry. For it is better to marry than to burn with passion.*

Paul is not speaking of a special gift here for those to stay unmarried. Jesus said that to some it was given to stay eunuchs #todo/opzoeken Mt 19:12, welk woord in het Grieks gebruikt? However, ever I do not think this concerns a spiritual gift, but rather the ability to exercise self-control. There surely are those who do not long for a spouse, and perhaps there are those who do not even get aroused by the bodies of the other sex, but then there are also those who are able to exercise self-control, but do long for a spouse. For those, Paul says, it is better for them to remain single. Would this not be very unfair for them if they are not allowed to have a spouse? First of all, this is not a command, but a comparative statement of what is better, and it would not be a sin if they do decide to get married—but, yes, Christians should always choose what is best. So even if this is not a transgression #todo/opzoeken  difference between sin and transgression in Bible Project, where a transgression means that one hurts another person and a sin is missing the mark
because one was not hurting another person, it is still missing God's mark, which by definition is sin. Second of all, it would not be unfair, for they have something others do not have. To quote the *Spider-Man* #tags/movies movie (the Tobey Maguire #tags/famouspeople/actors version), #quotes
> *With great power comes great responsibility*  
and in the same way God expects people whom he has gifted more to live up to a higher standard. Thirdly, it would also not be unfair because this situation would provide one with a much more fruitful life and intensity of knowing Christ. 
**Example.** I once met a female missionary who wanted to have nothing of relationships because she wanted to give all of her life to God. I am not so sure of the particulars, but she came to the Netherlands to study criminology and then felt a calling to go into ministry. She eventually received a full scholarship to study at Tynndale in a miraculous way and also served in a Christian youth hostel in Amsterdam for two years. Years later she told me she had fallen in love with someone, but she intensely prayed to God that He would remove these feelings from her, because she did not want to deviate in her path. She needed no man in her life to give her joy, for God was all she needed. 

*10 To the married I give this charge (not I, but the Lord): the wife should not separate from her husband 11 (but if she does, she should remain unmarried or else be reconciled to her husband), and the husband should not divorce his wife.*

I cannot see it any clearer than this. Paul says that something *should* not happen, but alas, if it has happened, let bygones by bygones. God forgives what has been done in the past, but there are two things we can do: we should fix what we can and when we can and we should not make things worse when we do not have to. So when a wife or a husband has mustered up the courage and received the power and the wisdom of the Holy Spirit to reconcile with his wife (I have not written "ex-wife" on purpose) he should do so. If he encounters a woman he likes and wants to marry, he should not do so. There is no need for him to remarry. 
What about extreme situations, such as that of Johann Sebastian Bach, who was left with 12 (?) children #todo/opzoeken when his wife died and probably remarried to find a wife to take care of his children? Remarriage after death is not a transgression, but supposing that his wife divorced him and then left him with many children, he could hire a nanny. Even if in those days it was not allowed to have a man and a woman living under the same roof (see for example the movie #tags/movies *Love Comes Softly*), he could have found other ways although I cannot think of any. But if he were burning with desire, then—in order to choose the best out of two bad options—he should choose to remarry, yet not for the sole purpose of finding someone to take care of his children. However, finding a new mother for his children would be a good argument.
There could be a conflict of interest here. If the widow is not interested in marrying again, but he knows his children need a mother and not just a caretaker, would it be good to marry? I see two arguments against remarriage, that is Paul's advice and the widow's own wishes, to one for. Depending on the need of the children, however, one argument could weigh heavier than the other. So this, I believe, is a matter of wisdom from the Holy Spirit, Who can tell what to do in a specific situation. 

*12 To the rest I say (I, not the Lord) that if any brother has a wife who is an unbeliever, and she consents to live with him, he should not divorce her. 13 If any woman has a husband who is an unbeliever, and he consents to live with her, she should not divorce him. 14 For the unbelieving husband is ::made holy:: because of his wife, and the unbelieving wife is made holy because of her husband. Otherwise your children would be unclean, but as it is, ::they are holy::.*

The children are used as proof here of holiness and inducing from that the husband should be holy as well. A question I have, however, is how we can tell the children are holy. Of course up to a certain age children are innocent and in that sense holy, for even though they have sinned, they were not aware of their sin and their sin was—in a sense—not counted (Romans 5:13), for even though the law has already been given since Moses—and we are far past this time and more importantly, we are aware of this law—young children are not aware of this law nor do they understand the concept of sinning up to a certain age. Even so for the woman—who has also sinned—her sin is not counted because her righteousness is credited to her and her sin is paid for by Jesus Christ. But I do not see any connection between the wife's holiness and that of children who are capable of sinning deliberately and that of her husband.
I think the thought Paul brings forth here is that she is holy and that her children whom she has brought forth hence are holy as well. Perhaps the wife is specifically mentioned here instead of the husband who did not bear nor brought for the children. 
#biblestudy/questions

*15 But if the unbelieving partner separates, let it be so. In such cases the brother or sister is not ::enslaved::. God has called you to peace. 16 For how do you know, wife, whether you will save your husband? Or how do you know, husband, whether you will save your wife?*

See also notes on v.39. 
If in *such cases* the brother or sister is not enslaved, it means that in other cases the brother and sister are enslaved. What would these other cases be then? If this has to do with the next sentence about being called to peace, perhaps this means that we are slaves to God who must bring about peace when we are able to (cf. #todo/opzoeken in as far as it depends on you...). Another explanation is that we are enslaved to our spouse for as long as we live, but not in this case. In that case this would mean that one is allowed to marry again. However, my personal view goes against this because only God can separate a husband and wife, either by divine intervention or through death—and I have never heard of the first one, except when God divorced His people #todo/opzoeken in Isaiah? and that too was only temporary. If human beings could so easily be separated, simply by not believing in Christ anymore and then wanting to separate, this would go against the power of God. 
To give an illustration, suppose a married Christian couple want to divorce but the church will not let them because it is a sin. Then all they need to do, is to let one person, say, the husband, tell the church that he has become an atheist or an agnost. Even though he will be lying, no one will know the truth. After that he can say he wants to divorce and no one will condemn him of sin, for he has become an unbeliever and only believers are judged by Christians (see 1 Corinthians 5:12), and the believer will not be judged, for she is allowed to let him go. Then, she would be able to remarry and stay in the church and so would he. He could then silently, in another church, become a Christian again and marry another Christian woman, without breaking the Law of God. 
This of course is not God's intention. If anyone is married, whether before the government of before God, no one can separate this marriage except for the one who married them. So this is not the pastor, but the One in Whose Name the pastor married them, which is God. And this is also not the government, because the government acts on behalf of God (Romans 13:1-2). So only God can separate two persons, but He will never do that for He hates divorce (#todo/opzoeken  waar?). 
Unfortunately John MacArthur disagrees with this view of divorce and remarriage of John Piper and David Pawson #tags/famouspeople/christian and writes in *MacSBNnkjv* 
> Throughout Scripture, whenever legitimate divorce occurs, remarriage is assumed. When divorce is permitted, so is remarriage.  

***Live as You Are Called***
*17 Only let each person lead the life that the Lord has assigned to him, and to which God has called him. This is my rule in all the churches. 18 Was anyone at the time of his call already circumcised? Let him not seek to remove the marks of circumcision. Was anyone at the time of his call uncircumcised? Let him not seek circumcision. 19 For neither circumcision counts for anything nor uncircumcision, but keeping the commandments of God.*

Could we extrapolate this command of Paul when one was baptized as a child to stay as such and not to get baptized by submersion? The argument Paul gives, is that the outer appearance is not important and thus the form of baptism is not important. The inner being, shown through obedience to God's commandments is what matters. However, one could then say that a wedding is not important either, for that too is only outer appearance. Of course this is argument is not valid, for the wedding is a *ceremony* with an important symbolism and as the baptism is. So the baptism has not replaced the circumcision, but the ceremony that shows one's conversion and total commitment to God and the celebration of this, has replaced the ceremony of the circumcision. And circumcision itself (not the ceremony, but the action), which was a symbol of being part of God's family baptism, has been replaced by the dedication of the child to God, taking place in the form of infant baptism or infant dedication, of which the latter is Biblically seen more correct, for a baptism symbolizes a voluntary choice of the washing of sins, while the infant has neither sin nor voluntary choice. 

*20 Each one should remain in the condition in which he was called. 21 Were you a bondservant when called? Do not be concerned about it. (But if you can gain your freedom, avail yourself of the opportunity.) 22 For he who was called in the Lord as a bondservant is a freedman of the Lord. Likewise he who was free when called is a bondservant of Christ. 23 You were bought with a price; do not become bondservants of men. 24 So, brothers, in whatever condition each was called, there let him remain with God.*

This is not about the work one is doing but rather about the state one is in. Paul does call the people up not to become bondservants, because this is more than just a job, for the master will also control the belongings and the rights of the bondservant, or in other words, slave. 
For those who claim that the Bible is not against slavery, verse 23 would be a definitive argument. Paul, on behalf of God, tells people not to become bondservants of men. Would that not be enough as an argument against slavery? If others were to say that this only means that we should not let ourselves be enslaved, but not that the system of slavery is bad, that would be a strange conclusion. Of course if Christians are not to become slaves because it is bad, it would also be bad to enslave others. Moreover, Jesus has commanded us to treat others in the way we want to be treated ourselves (#todo/opzoeken  waar?).
Perhaps Paul is also calling up people not to give up their marital state, although he already mentioned that specifically. #todo/nogaftemaken 

***The Unmarried and the Widowed***
*25 Now concerning the ::betrothed::, I have no command from the Lord, but I give my judgment as one who by the Lord's mercy is trustworthy. 26 I think that in view of the ::present distress:: it is good for a person to remain as he is. 27 Are you bound to a wife? Do not seek to be free. Are you free from a wife? Do not seek a wife. 28 But if you do marry, you have not sinned, and if a ::betrothed woman:: marries, she has not sinned. Yet those who marry will have ::worldly troubles::, and I would spare you that. 29 This is what I mean, brothers: the appointed time has grown very short.*

David Pawson #tags/famouspeople/christian has earlier mentioned that the letter of the Corinthians should be read in its full context. Now, of course this is true, but he names a few examples of which the interpretation I do not agree with. He mentions the wearing of head coverings in #todo/opzoeken  as a quote from a letter that the Corinthians sent him, and not as a quote from himself. He also mentioned that v.26 is only valid in the context of the Corinthians, which was that the Corinthians were under much pressure of sin practised by the person committing sexual immorality with his (step)mother, boasting and division, and lawsuits among brothers (1 Corinthians 5,1,6, respectively). In that situation it would certainly not be wise to marry, but to solve matters first. However, in vv.29-31 it is clear that Paul is speaking of the end-times, which is only beginning in his day and in our day has come near the end, and it seems that we will soon be entering the period described in Revelation 2ff where the seven seals are broken one by one, if we have not already entered one of these. 

*From now on, let those who have wives live as though they had none, 30 and those who mourn as though they were not mourning, and those who rejoice as though they were not rejoicing, and those who buy as though they had no goods, 31 and those who deal with the world as though they had no dealings with it. For the present form of this world is passing away.*

This part might come across as strange and the interpretation is heavily dependent on what Paul actually means. Paul could be saying that there is a war and that the most important thing right now is to fight and that therefore men need to leave their wives, those mourning need to stop mourning and those rejoicing should stop doing that, because we all need to get serious and prepare for war. Even those who have business with the world (v.31) should prepare themselves for not having any dealing with it. 
To me this is a literal call for preparation for the end-time. Sure, those who have a business need to keep it running to gain income, but what is the use of income if the world passes away? What happens with all the inventory one has stocked if there is no one to buy it? And what with all the investments one has made? All of the liquidity and soft assets would not mean a thing anymore. It would be much better in that case to have invested in short term assets and gained the fruit of those before the end of the end-times. 
As explained further in v.32ff a married man will concern himself about worldly matters, and the businessman will concern himself about his business. The married businessman will then concern himself about his business, his wife, his children and his parents if they are alive and what not more? How much concern is there for the Lord and the upcoming end-times? Therefore, even if one is married or has any other preoccupation, let him do as if he had none, and prepare himself. 

This might be true for us, one might think, but did Paul warn the Corinthians and all others who received this letter two thousand years too early? No, preparation has always been the key to preservation. Christianity is becoming extinct as we see and where we see huge gains in the number of Christians we also see huge drops. Just like a university college will have thousands of graduates, only some will pursue their Master's degree and out of these few even less will pursue their doctorate, being able to at least partially pass along the knowledge they have obtained and only during their doctorate(Footnote: During the usual four-year doctorate at universities PhD students are required to teach undergraduate and graduate students in their field. This, however, is only in specific courses and only for a few years. It would be something like a paralegal to a lawyer or a clerk to a judge.). Most PhDs will find a job outside of education, some or most will do so in research, and only a very small number of graduates will become an assistent professor at the university, leaving little to almost none to become an associate or full professor. 
In the same way Christians who are able to disciple Christians who are able to teach other Christians according to 2 Timothy 2:2 are very rare, and if they exist, it is even rarer to find them having the right doctrine, keeping the peace and exercising their missional calling. *Someone* discipled Rick Warren for example (which was Billy Graham among others) and John Piper and so on, but we hardly hear anything about their disciples. We do hear something about Billy Graham's disciples, his son Franklin Graham for example, we also know that Wayne Cordeiro discipled Steve Cioccolanti #tags/famouspeople/christian but there are not many examples of third- and fourth-generation disciples. In other words, I am not saying that there are few Christians at any given time in history, but I am saying that out of the many megachurches there are in the world with many Christians belonging to it, most will die out after a few generations. They will be saved, for that is what God promised, but the number of their disciples, including their children, will be less than this first generation and so on. Only a handful of Christians will be missional and effective and have a fruitful Christian life. I am not speaking about one's calling, for some have the calling to be apostles and others to be prophets and teachers, but even if one has this calling, he still needs a congregation with all the other gifts in order to be powerful, fruitful and effective. Where would the prophet and apostle go to, for example, when he needs pastoral care? Who would help him and his house with practical tasks and his administration? It is a mature Christian with the right calling *together* with other mature Christians with other callings to cooperate and work out this next generation. It is them *together* when I say "a handful." 
This handful of Christians exists because of the preservation by the preparation that Paul calls for. They have been trained and discipled to look forward towards the end-times, being anxious about how to please the Lord—even if they were married or preoccupied in some other sense. #todo/nogaftemaken ? 

*32 I want you to be ::free from anxieties::. The unmarried man is anxious about the things of the Lord, how to please the Lord. 33 But the married man is anxious about worldly things, how to please his wife, 34 and his interests are divided.*

Paul wants us to be free from anxieties, but at the same time he wants us to have anxieties yet about the things of the Lord and about worldly things. Perhaps it is a right for some things to say that what we do, but should not do, in or for this world, we should do to God. So for example people idolize money, which they should not, and instead they should idolize God. People put all of their time in hobbies and other worldly things, watching movies and other things, but they should not, yet if they do the same for God, it would be a good thing. Even if a married man did just that for God, it would first of all be better than if he were to do these worldly things, but second of all, a man who is willing to give up so much for God would clearly understand that God tells him that he does not need to give that much if he has a wife. Rather yet, God would command the man to spend more time with his wife. 

*And the unmarried or betrothed woman is anxious about the things of the Lord, how to be holy in body and spirit. But the married woman is anxious about worldly things, how to please her husband. 35 I say this for your own benefit, not to lay any restraint upon you, but to promote good order and to secure your undivided devotion to the Lord.*

Paul distinguishes here between the unmarried man and the woman who are focused on God. He says that the man would focus on how to please the Lord, but the woman would focus on how to be holy in body and spirit. We know that there is a distinction in the roles and behavior of the two sexes. In marriage the woman learns how to submit herself to her husband, while the man learns how to become a better leader and love his wife more. She looks up to him, while he looks up to God and because of this difference in perspective the associated tasks and growth is different as well. 
In being single #todo/opzoeken/engels beter woord daarvoor, maar niet celibacy, commitment? however, one would expect both sexes to have the same perspective of looking at God, but still the growth is different. This is perhaps because all women and men first of all are different to begin with: women will stay women no matter in what role they are and the same goes for men. A woman who is unaffected by her relationships, because she has none, and even when she is treated like men, will still behave like a woman—and the same goes for men. 
The second reason, however, is that a woman will always be in a world with men and women, and again, the same for men. Amy Carmichael for example was a single woman who served in India as a missionary to women and children, but there were men who traveled with her, such as the husband of one of her disciples. If she grew in what Christ wanted her to be, she would have naturally become more humble because an unbelieving person who spends time with a Christian would naturally become more like Christ himself, given that he is open to the Gospel. So if a man spent time with Amy Carmichael and the latter were very manly, the man would not feel respected but rather suppressed and become less like the leader that Jesus is. Also, the women (some of whom were married) would become more masculine, making them less attractive to their spouses. 

*36 If anyone thinks that he is not behaving properly toward his betrothed, if his passions are strong, and it has to be, let him do as he wishes: let them marry—it is no sin. 37 But whoever is firmly established in his heart, being under no necessity but having his desire under control, and has determined this in his heart, to keep her as his betrothed, he will do well. 38 So then he who marries his betrothed does well, and he who refrains from marriage will do even better.*

So Paul says that refraining from marriage is better then getting married. Burning with desires but not getting married is worse than getting married. Where, however, would the person in verse 37 be positioned, where a man has a betrothed one (in the KJV translated as "virigin", but disregarding the translation but looking at the context I would interpret this as a fiancée) but postponing the marriage when he has his desire under control?

If I interpret this correctly this person is to be placed between the former two situations. If he has a betrothed one, he cannot divorce her unless for reasons of fornication #todo/opzoeken fornication the same as sexual immorality, but if he can control his desires he can postpone the marriage. 
However, if it so happens to be that he can control his desires all of his life, like Paul could, and he was betrothed to her for the wrong reasons, for example because their parents arranged the marriage, then it would be unfair to the woman not to marry her. Not only could (and perhaps would, in those times and in smaller villages especially) others think negatively of the woman, namely that something is wrong with the woman yet not substantial enough to "divorce" her over it, that is break off #todo/opzoeken/engels the engagement, but also would the woman herself, even if she knows her fiancé's Biblical considerations, be under a certain duress if she is willing and longing to marry and have children. 
However, there is also the possibility that like him she too can control her desires. In this case neither party would be #todo/opzoeken/engels negatief bejegend disadvantaged, but the only disadvantage for both parties would be that the world would think strangely of them. In fact the couple would remain merely friends for the rest of their lives. 
The question then would be, would a divorce not be allowed in this case? Jesus mentioned in Matthew  #todo/opzoeken  that an illegal divorce would make the woman an adulteress if she marries another man, but in this case both the man and the woman would not remarry, so a divorce would be warranted. 
The only doubt that remains then would be what the world thinks of them. The world would think that the woman had committed sexual immorality. Now this argument would be valid in those days, and most likely in underdeveloped countries, where people tend to gossip more. In developed countries people divorce for all kinds of reasons, and especially when an engagement is broken off, people will not think strange of this and—in my experiece—rarely relate this to sexual immorality. 
I am not saying the standard of morality in developed countries is higher, on the contrary, but the culture is more individual and people tend to think less about others and more about themselves. In most circumstances this would be a bad thing, but in the rare case of a legitimate breaking of an engagement as mentioned above, this would be beneficial. 

*39 A wife is bound to her husband as long as he lives. But if her husband dies, she is free to be married to whom she wishes, only in the Lord. 40 Yet in my judgment she is happier if she remains as she is. And I think that I too have the Spirit of God.*

The word *bound* which is *deō* in Greek (Gr: δέω) does not have the same root as *bondage* in v.15, which is *douloō* (Gr: δουλόω). MacArthur's comment that a spouse who is not under bondage anymore is also not bound to his spouse therefore is not necessarily true. (Even if the same word were used, this would not even necessarily be the right form of reasoning.) Given the context of this chapter it is clear from v.11 that one is always bound to his spouse and the only way not to sin any more is to stay single or be reconciled.
On top of that, though meant for widows, a person is happier is he remains as he is, Paul claims here, or better said, they should remain in the same status. The word "status" here, however, is not clear. I do not know then whether Paul means that one should keep his "sub-status" as well to become more happy, or that a change of sub-status within the same status will not effect one's happiness. A sub-status is in this case defined by a situational but smaller change within one's status. This then could mean that a divorced person should stay divorced and that that would give him more happiness than reconciling with his spouse for then he remains both in his status and sub-status, or that he should reconcile with his wife and return to the status as it was meant to be. For his status in God's eyes is still "married", but his *sub-status* would be "temporaririly separated" and the latter sub-status was never an intended part of marriage when God created it. In each case, Paul's advise would not mean getting married again, for that most certainly would change one's status and sub-status. 

#biblestudy/devotionals/1corinthians


#todo  Vandaag
- [ ] CR les voorbereiden deze week + materiaal naar Mat sturen
- [ ] CR SSG huiswerk
- [ ] Chinees sorteren karakters per les, jaar, lesmateriaal
- [ ] Memorisatiekaartjes maken van hard papier en op juiste formaat uitprinten of met Sketch doen
- [ ] Memorisatie datum toevoegen voor wekelijkse herinnering. 
- [ ] Memorisatie tabbladen maken voor dag, week, maand, kwartaal, halfjaar, jaar, nieuw
- [ ] Alle Chinese karakters van LingoAce in Sheets zetten -> doing
- [ ] Has Obama written a letter to Trump and Trump one to Biden?
- [ ] Trump tapijt affaire
- [ ] Lijst maken van Most Frequently Used words
- [ ] how to make ~~肉鬆和~~ 肉乾
- [x] Voorbereiden preek 7 november (1 Korinthe 6). 
- [ ] Jürgen vertellen over vraag over of Paul geïnspireerd was door de Heilige Geest. Ja, alles wat hij schreef was zo. Het is niet zo dat het ene minder waar is, omdat hij zei dat dat van de Heilige Geest was en dat andere, van hemzelf, minder waar is. Dat zouden we met een korreltje zout kunnen nemen, als de brief *niet* in de officiële canon terecht was gekomen, maar nu is het wel daarin terecht gekomen onder leiding van de Heilige Geest. De Heilige Geest heeft dus deze brief als waar gezien en geselecteerd. Daarom mogen we ervan uit gaan dat Paulus' woorden kloppend zijn, vooral wanneer hij zegt: "Maar ook ik denk dat ik de Heilige Geest heb."
- [ ] Waar in Mark over de duivel die uit de hemel gevallen? Marcus 3:
- [x] afspraak maken met Noorloos Kaatsheuvel? Kopen, zie TODO. creditcard niet vergeten
- [ ] Brief schrijven aan moeder
- [ ] Makro boodschappen
- [ ] Notenshop, meer havermout etc. 
- [ ] Biologische melk groots opslaan