# 1 Corinthians 4 (ESV) 
***The Ministry of Apostles***
*1 This is how one should regard us, as servants of Christ and stewards of the mysteries of God. 2 Moreover, it is required of stewards that they be found faithful. 3 But with me it is a very small thing that I should be judged by you or by any human court. In fact, I do not even judge myself. 4 For I am not aware of anything against myself, but I am not thereby acquitted. It is the Lord who judges me.*

Do not think of yourself too good. Even someone as honest as Paul, could not think of anything against himself, but still knew there was a possibility that he was guilty of something. Who are we then to say that we are pure? Of course, no one is sinless, Paul is not speaking about that, but he is speaking of having reconciled with any person one has sinned against and asked forgiveness to God. 

*5 Therefore do not pronounce judgment before the time, before the Lord comes, who will bring to light the things now hidden in darkness and will disclose the purposes of the heart. Then each one will receive his commendation from God.*

We should not judge others too quickly. Of course some things are obviously wrong, such as #tags/famouspeople/christian Ravi Zacharias' #church/sermons/@ravizacharias and Bill Hybels' sexual escapades with masseuses and his secretary, respectively. We can judge that that is wrong, but whether this person is bad, is another thing. John MacArthur #tags/famouspeople/christian —I have heard—said in a sermon that he thinks the former is not even a Christian— #todo/opzoeken I would need to listen to that sermon myself, before judging MacArthur—based on the years and perhaps decades of secret sins, progressing in the severity of the sin, without confession—all of which do not fit the Christian life. He has a point, but there still is a glimpse of hope in me that Zacharias still is saved(Footnote: It is remarkable, however, that two separate pastors, Ray Comfort and Steve Cioccolanti #tags/famouspeople/christian —in my opinion very honest Christians (although Cioccolanti is very quiet about his rumored two previous marriages and it seems he defends the allowance of divorce, see the section on slander within the chapter of the Ninth Commandment in his book #tags/books *Trump's Unfinished Business*)—both argued that they were never fans of Ravi Zacharias, even before this leaked. Comfort was against Zacharias' form of answering questions with many eloquent words where the question remained whether the listener eventually understood the answer or not. Cioccolanti simply argued that he never finished a sermon of Zacharias when he started one, for some reason, but now he understands. God intervened in that way.).

*6 I have applied all these things to myself and Apollos for your benefit, brothers, that you may learn by us not to go beyond what is written, that none of you may be puffed up in favor of one against another.*

The leader is the one who should apply all he teaches to himself first. Paul applied this not only to himself, but also to his follow-up leader, Apollos. Paul is also very confident in himself of having applied this attitude of humility, which seems to be contradicting. It is like someone saying of himself that he is humble, which immediately makes him less humble. Paul says this, however, not to boast, but only to teach and warn the brothers of Corinth of further sins. 

*7 For who sees anything different in you? What do you have that you did not receive? If then you received it, why do you boast as if you did not receive it?*

The sin of the Corinthians here is pride. They boast as if everything they have was from their own works. They forgot that everything they had, was from God and that they used to be as sinful as described in 1 Corinthians 6:9-10. Verse 11 tells us that they have been washed *by God*, it was not from themselves. 

*8 Already you have all you want! Already you have become rich! Without us you have become kings! And would that you did reign, so that we might share the rule with you! 9 For I think that God has exhibited us apostles as last of all, like men sentenced to death, because we have become a spectacle to the world, to angels, and to men. 10 We are fools for Christ's sake, but you are wise in Christ. We are weak, but you are strong. You are held in honor, but we in disrepute. 11 To the present hour we hunger and thirst, we are poorly dressed and buffeted and homeless, 12 and we labor, working with our own hands. When reviled, we bless; when persecuted, we endure; 13 when slandered, we entreat. We have become, and are still, like the scum of the world, the refuse of all things.*
*14 I do not write these things to make you ashamed, but to admonish you as my beloved children. 15 For though you have countless guides in Christ, you do not have many fathers. For I became your father in Christ Jesus through the gospel. 16 I urge you, then, be imitators of me. 17 That is why I sent you Timothy, my beloved and faithful child in the Lord, to remind you of my ways in Christ, as I teach them everywhere in every church. 18 Some are arrogant, as though I were not coming to you. 19 But I will come to you soon, if the Lord wills, and I will find out not the talk of these arrogant people but their power. 20 For the kingdom of God does not consist in talk but in power. 21 What do you wish? Shall I come to you with a rod, or with love in a spirit of gentleness?*

#biblestudy/devotionals/1corinthians
