# 1 Corinthians 6 (ESV) 
***Lawsuits Against Believers***
*1 When one of you has a grievance against another, does he dare go to law before the unrighteous instead of the saints? 2 Or do you not know that the saints will judge the world? And if the world is to be judged by you, are you incompetent to try ::trivial:: cases?*

The Corinthians apparently did not know, at least they were not conscious of this, that they would judge the world. A judge presides over matters, he is not involved in matters. The Corinthians should have judged in a spiritual way, but they were judging worldly. Even if they were judging worldly, they would still have to judge over matters, just like worldly judges and not pertain in these matters. Here they were involved in the issues of the world themselves and they were sustaining in these, not even trying to solve the matter, but only trying to win. 

Now about these trivial matters, what were these matters? Of course we do not know the exact reason of the fights within the Corinthian community, but everyone who has been *involved* in church matters or in ministry for a certain amount of time, so not only the attendees of church services, has experienced fights and arguments up to different extents, and not rarely even to the brink of causing division within the congregation and splitting up into two churches. These matters can range from anything between a personal preference of the main language in sermons up to whether or not there should be a children's service, but everything has to do with pride. Of course I am just mentioning two random examples, but these are a few from my knowledge of divisions in one of the previous congregations I attended.  

In short, there was a division between two parties where one believes all children should speak their ethnical language, which is Chinese, and hence the children should attend the sermons as well, whereas another group realized the children's insufficient comprehension of the language. The first group consisted of parents who spoke the Chinese language very well, were grown up monolingually, mostly spoke Mandarin Chinese with each other and taught their children accordingly. They often had office jobs here in the Netherlands where the husband worked and the wife took care of the household and in effect had much more time to spend with the children and thus teach them Chinese. I am speaking of the Taiwanese as one might have guessed, for this is the only Chinese group with these characteristics. The other group consisted of people who had grown up bi- or trilingually, spoke an additional two dialects at the least, often only had an elementary school education and had jobs in restaurants or other jobs with long hours where both the husband and wife had to work. I am speaking of the Malay and Indonesian groups here(Footnote: The group from Mainland China was very small as the people were not allowed to freely travel or migrate from China. The people from Hong Kong residing in the Netherlands were somewhat in between the two groups. They spoke mainly one language and no other dialects, but they also did not have higher education and hence worked in lower class jobs.) This in most cases led to neglect of the child, and even when the parents did have time and wanted to teach their children Chinese, they were not capable of this and lacked the didactical skills to do this properly. This led to children hardly being able to speak any Chinese on a regular conversational level, let alone understanding of the Biblical terminology the sermons. All this is aside of the content, which was also adapted to children or to practice nor was it brought in an enthusiastic way (this statement is not from my experience, for I was not there at the time, but in later years I have experienced the Chinese sermons as such). 
It is really clear to see where the pride is in each of these two groups. Keep in mind that Chinese people in general are not good at expressing their feelings, let alone describing them, nor at empathizing with others. The first group failed to see the second group's—and their children's—limitations because they only look at their own capabilities, in other words, they are self-centered, but also selfish because they do not even care about the other group's feelings. For them it is something like: "They just need to learn Chinese. Our children did it, so can yours." The second group, on the other hand, refused or were not able to speak out their lack of capabilities and their feelings, partially due to the fact that they had never learned, but they were also too proud to admit their shortcomings. 
Even in the case of my own parents, where I addressed this issue and blamed them for not teaching me Chinese properly, my mother refused to acknowledge that she spoke Mandarin Chinese, say, 80% of the time, and mixed in Dutch and English words in the remainder, and spoke three dialects with my father (Hakka (客家), Cantonese and Hokkien (福建)) aside from standard Mandarin.

*3 Do you not know that we are to judge angels? How much more, then, matters pertaining to this life! 4 So if you have such cases, why do you lay them before those who have no standing in the church?*

Perhaps Paul is saying here that the Corinthians were capable of judging angels, but that they did not know that (or were not aware of it) and that they also thought they were incapable of dealing with this trivial matters. This is very remarkable though and hence we see Paul's surprise. For how can one not know the power he has to judge angels? Perhaps this power was not known fully, but at the least it should have been known partially. 
As an example, take any random movie about people with hidden powers, to mind only comes the manga *Slam Dunk* #tags/movies about a person who is tall and can jump really high, and who is very strong as well. His potential to play basketball is present, but he is still very coarse in his movements. Even before his road to basketball his strength was already visible. 
Now in this case we are talking about much simpler things, trivial matters, Paul calls it, pertaining to *this life*. Matters of this life are so simple when we compare these with spiritual matters. I once had a discussion with someone on Quora about what would give more freedom, to be more precise, whether a restriction could provide more freedom. I was not realizing we were talking about two different things, I was talking about true spiritual freedom while the other person was talking about worldly freedom. His definition was really simple, the more you are allowed to do, the more freedom you have. My definition was much more intricate, because what you are allowed to do, will increase the odds of you actually doing it, and when you do some of these things, they will restrict your freedom to exercise it in the future. For example, if you have the freedom to write, but you have no hands, then this freedom is worth nothing to you. If one has the freedom to play with fireworks while another person does not, then the first person, from the worldly perspective, has more freedom. However, from the spiritual perspective he is limiting his future freedom and his power to exercise it. In a philosophical argument the spiritual definition of freedom would definitely be a better one than the worldly one, for it deals with more factors such as time and the power to exercise. Ultimately freedom is not what is important, it is the worth of freedom that matters. 
Back to our main point, the Corinthians brothers were arguing about worldly matters and not about difficult spiritual matters. How could it be that they could not solve such simple matters while they were educated in the Bible and having the Holy Spirit along with His wisdom? 
And if it could not be solved between the two brothers who were arguing, why would they not bring it to another brother? Why did they have to bring it to someone outside of the church? Was there no other person in the congregation wise enough to settle this dispute? From the tone of v.5 Paul thinks otherwise. 
Perhaps the answer can be found in vv.7-8. A Christian brother who tries to settle the dispute would have to admonish both parties of being wrong for going against each other and would ask both parties to apologize and forgive each other. There would be suffering wrong and being defrauded (v.8), there would be no win, for there is already a loss due to the loss of unity between brothers. A worldly court case would at least still provide a win to one party, but at a loss of the reputation of Christians. But the Corinthians were selfish, they had rather the other party suffer a loss than themselves, they had rather the reputation of Christians and their church suffer damage than themselves. 

*5 I say this to your ::shame::. Can it be that there is no one among you wise enough to settle a dispute between the brothers, 6 but brother goes to law against brother, and that before unbelievers?*

Note that in 1 Corinthians 4:14 Paul explicitly says that he is not mentioning all the persecution and suffering he and Sosthenes have (which is probably what he means when he refers to "we", but there are likely others involved as well) in order that the Corinthians be ashamed of their actions, but to admonish them. The Corinthians needed to realize that they were living in the wrong situation. They were rich, comfortable and powerful (1 Corinthians 4:8) and although Paul was being ironic here and lightly mocking them, they most certainly were not in the situation that Paul was in. The difference between that situation and this situation here in 1 Corinthians 6 is that they did not need to be ashamed for the comfort they were in. A rich Christian in a fancy house, who has much power, does not need to be ashamed of his blessedness, but he needs to realize Who it was Who gave him all of these blessings. They were being admonished for the arrogance with which they boasted to one another about what wisdom the persom whom they followed had. That was their sin and for that they *did* have to be ashamed. In this situation, however, there is nothing to be proud of. There are no blessings here, it is pure shamefulness. 
There are five (or more) accumulative factors that only make their shamefulness greater: 1. Not only are they doing wrong by going against one another (the reason for the court case, see also v.7), 2. they are also doing wrong against *Christian* brothers (v.8), 3. they do not solve the problem themselves (v.6), 4. it makes it even worse that these are *trivial* matters (v.2), 5. they are doing this in the presence of unbelievers (not explicitly stated), and 6. they settle this in a court run by unbelievers (v.6), and lastly, 7. these unbelievers are not merely heathens, they are pagans as well, worshippers of idols, practising occult and immoral rituals, and literally prostituting themselves to idols and other people and sometimes even animals. #church/material/sermon

*7 To have lawsuits at all with one another is ::already:: a defeat for you. Why not rather suffer wrong? Why not rather be ::defrauded::? 8 But you yourselves wrong and defraud—even your own brothers!*

We are so weak and our pride knows this. It uses our weak points and our weak moments. It knows that our weak point is that we do not want to admit our loss. It is our pride that stands in the way of following and obeying God. And so, in order to prevent ourselves from being at a loss, even if we were right, we had rather defraud others than be defrauded ourselves.

The trivial matters for which there are lawsuits are unknown to us, but what we can deduct from this verse is that these do not concern brotherly matters where there are material misconceptions, such as when a contract has not been clearly defined and one thinks he has the right to a higher percentage of the profit. In that case Paul would advise them to suffer the wrong that has been done (cf. Colossians 3:25 and see also notes there). Here, however, the "brothers" wrong and defraud themselves. It is like this contract was set up ambiguously on purpose in order to defraud the other. 
I put "brothers" between quotes because I cannot believe that any of these defrauding people could be a Christian. They might call themselves Christian, but I cannot make any sense of a Christian willingly defrauding another Christian. Some use vv11,19,20 as arguments that the addressees in this letter were saved Christians, because they had been bought by Christ, but I say that this needs to be interpreted in such a way that only some were Christians. I do not have a waterproof explanation for this, all I can say is these observations do not rhyme in my mind. Then again, I am not infallible and God's ways are miraculous. The way Christians are saved, but still pulled by and act in the flesh is incomprehensible to me. 
I know of my own mistakes and sins in the past, even after my baptism and so-called conversion at 16 years of age, so therefore I had rather put my actual conversion forward to, say, age 25 or older, so that I can say that the sins I have committed between ages 16 and 25 were done in the flesh and *before* my conversion—how else can I explain my sexually immoral sins while having in me the Holy Spirit? The only thing I can say to that is that I was not as aware of the graveness of the sin as I am now, and God takes that factor into account (I think). In this way even the graveness of defrauding the other could be unknown to them—the one who defrauds would perhaps not know how much he would hurt his brother and damage the trust between them, but *afterwards*, when he has realized the hurt he has caused, he would have to repent and change his ways.

See also notes on v.4. 

*9 Or do you not know that the unrighteous will not inherit the kingdom of God? Do not be deceived: neither the sexually immoral, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor men who practice homosexuality, 10 nor thieves, nor the greedy, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor swindlers will inherit the kingdom of God. 11 And such were some of you. But you were washed, you were sanctified, you were justified in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ and by the Spirit of our God.*

Paul writes this part to continue from the previous paragraph and the last verse therein, saying that the Corinthians themselves defraud each other. He notes then in this paragraph that the unrighteous will not inherit the kingdom of God, as if warning them about the defrauding. If they *continue* doing this, they will not inherit the kingdom of God, not because their sin was too great, but because it shows that they have not repented from their sin. Paul emphasizes that they were washed and they should not get dirty again. It is as if he is saying: "Christ has gone through all this trouble for you, do not make yourselves unholy again!"
Even though Paul does not use the word "continue" I think we can interpret it this way, otherwise this would mean that everyone who has been one of these people in vv.9-10 can never be saved anymore, which we know is not true. But still, they should not be *deceived*, Paul emphasizes, for they should also not think that continuing doing these will grant them their stay in heaven. The deception is when people say: "Come as you are" upon which Paul would hypothetically say "that is true, but do not stay as you are." 

***Flee Sexual Immorality***
*12 “All things are lawful for me,” but not all things are helpful. “All things are lawful for me,” but I will not be dominated by anything. 13 “Food is meant for the stomach and the stomach for food”—and God will destroy both one and the other. The body is not meant for sexual immorality, but for the Lord, and the Lord for the body. 14 And God raised the Lord and will also raise us up by his power.*

All of a sudden Paul starts speaking about the principle of freedom under the God's Law which is the Law of the Spirit (see also Romans 8:2) and then continues on to the issue of sexual immorality. What is the relation between these two parts? Paul does not stop to say that he is switching to another topic or referring to another question that the Corinthians asked him, so perhaps the pericope put here in the ESV and in other translations is not correct.
According to *MacSBNnkjv* Paul addresses the quote here in v.12 which the Corinthians might have taken as their slogan, meaning that everything is allowed for God will forgive everything anyway. Paul does not say here that that is not true, although he does explicitly do so in other parts of the New Testament (e.g. Romans 8:13, Galatians 5:24-25), but most importantly he wants to address the sin of sexual immorality, because this is a much more serious sin which will stick to the body, literally(Footnote: Neurologically speaking, addictions to porn and gaming are the worst among all addictions, even worse than drug and alcohol abuse.) and has major long-term effects, which Paul already knew of in that time. 

**About vv.13-15.** v.13 also seems to be a quote that the Corinthians used. It is as if the Corinthians had a set of principles which they lived by but this set overruled their logic. 
**Example.** As an example, my father used to own a cafetaria where there were youngsters who order food in a rude manner. When my father addressed their behavior, they used a Dutch saying "de klant is koning" (EN: the customer is king), upon which my father scolded him and threatened to throw him out of joint. Yes, the customer can order what he wants, but the owner can still decide whether he even wants to have this customer or not. 
Now Paul perhaps wanted to address the issue of food offered to idols, which he would eventually do in the eighth chapter, but he already knows what the Corinthians would say, which is: "food is meant for the stomach, right? And the stomach was made for food." That is correct, Paul says, but it does not mean that you can put everything that is called "food" in your stomach. Not every kind of food would be beneficial. *MacSBNnkjv* provides a similar addition to this saying that this quote serves as a bridge to approval of sex with prostitutes. In a sense they were saying: "The genitals are made for sex, right? So why not do this?" And again Paul says—by way of v.12, for he still speaking from within this argument—that not all sex is beneficial. He does not literally say this because it flows from the former argument, but he continues on to say that even though the stomach is made for food, the body was not made for sex. The extrapolation the Corinthians used from the stomach to the genitals cannot be done so, Paul argues, for the body is meant for the Lord. The stomach is on a whole other level than the body. The stomach is something that will be destroyed, as will food, for these are worldly things and in heaven there will be no such thing as a stomach or food (perhaps there will be on the New Earth though, but with different a function, not to feed ourselves, for otherwise hunger would exist as well, but for enjoyment of all the food God has made). The body, however, is something with which we give God glory, the flesh body itself will be destroyed, but it is inseparable from the spiritual body (i.e. the spirit or the soul, I am still not really sure of the difference between these #biblestudy/questions). 

*15 Do you not know that your bodies are members of Christ? Shall I then take the members of Christ and make them members of a prostitute? Never! 16 Or do you not know that he who is joined to a prostitute becomes one body with her? For, as it is written, “The two will become one flesh.”*

**About v.15.** The term "members of a body" makes me think of a TV-series in the 90s called *Power Rangers* #tags/movies where several people controlled robotic animal machines. Those machinese could be connected to each other as members of one body. It would have been impossible for those machinese to be connected to another body and to their own body at the same time. In the same way Christians cannot be connected to another body and to that of Christ at the same time. 
What happens then when is joined to a prostitute? A Christian friend told me that when this happens before one is converted, the answer is simple: One is forgiven of all his sins in the past. But if he has converted and then still joins his body with that of a prostitute or, in the case of this letter, one's own stepmother, then the answer is much more difficult. In theory this sin will be forgiven, but also in theory a Christian would never do that. There are many sins a Christian can still do, even after his conversion, but I do not believe there can be a long premeditation. For during this period of premeditation of this sin, whether it is a murder or an affair, the Holy Spirit would have spoken to this person and given him the power to stop this sin. This person would have *wanted* to stop this sin *by definition*, for he had given his will over to Jesus Christ. 
I have had a period where I had sexually immoral thoughts and instead of casting them out, I allowed it. Then one day, I fell into the sin of watching porn. However, was this premeditation? I did not plan for days ahead what to watch, I actually did not want to watch and "thought" that I would keep it to fantasies as a way of an alternative to porn. 
#todo/nogaftemaken kan iemand vreemdgaan als hij al christen is? 

*17 But he who is joined to the Lord becomes one spirit with him. 18 Flee from sexual immorality. Every other sin a person commits is outside the body, but the sexually immoral person sins against his own body.*

I really do not know how to interpret this part about sinning against one's own body. Are we not sinning against our own body when we eat too much? That would be in the body itself, but not in the soul or mind. Then my question becomes, is anything that influences the mind and soul not sinning against the body then? Addictions to drugs (and these existed already in those times) can change one's soul and mind. Apparently there is either a sin that is even worse than these and separated in such a way that Paul can call the rest "every other sin" or there is another interpretation of this verse. 
It is hard to think of a sin so bad that it would completely unique and separated from the rest. Even the worst sin of all, be it pride, idolatry and murder, would be forgiven by God, temporary and not specifically against the body. However, if we consider a different interpretion of this 

*19 Or do you not know that your body is a temple of the Holy Spirit within you, whom you have from God? You are not your own,*

If one's own body is the temple, one is sinning against God's temple, which is effectively blasphemy #todo/opzoeken heiligschennis. In Dutch at least, the same word is used, but in English this word seems to be only used when God is blasphemed.
... when he defiles his own body by joining it with a prostitute.
I have categorized sin into three levels of severity:
* Anything that is outside the body
* Anything that affects the mind or morality
* Anything that effects the soul.

Eating food, for example—when one does not know it is offered to idols—will affect only the stomach, but that is not a big problem. When one does not know, it is not even a transgression, but only when one does.
When one does know it is sin and still eats, it will affect one's morality. In that case it will be a sin and it will be worse than the first category. This category also includes lying, because this affects the mind, but also drug abuse, for this encompasses both categories, but not the third category.
Only the joining of one's soul with another will affect the soul. I would say it is not only by sexually joining oneself with another person, but also by prostituting oneself to an idol and to take practice in satanic worship.
These people are of course sinning against God, their own mind and moral values. They are for example sacrificing children without any hesitation, which would normally seriously affect one's conscience, but these satanists do this not only with ease but with pleasure as well. 

It is clear that when one is joined to another he cannot be joined to Christ anymore. In the case of a husband and wife they are joined to each other indeed, but they are also joined to Christ, like a threefold string. They can be joined to Christ because their union is not sinful and hence they can as one enter Christ' union. However, someone who is joined to Satan cannot be joined to Christ anymore, because Christ of course cannot be joined to Satan. 
A question would be: Can someone who has been joined to Satan ever be separated and then join Christ? The same question applies for someone who has been joined to a prostitute. 

See notes on v.15, but also realize that Christ can forgive any sin. There are satanists who have converted into Christianity, although I doubt they were immersed as far in these satanic rituals that they would kill children or commit pedophilic acts. Ronald Bernard #tags/famouspeople for example was saved from this satanic cult by Jesus—he claims, but whether he is really a Christian I do not know—but he never joined the more serious rites. 
But how about someone like Joris Demmink(Footnote: The highest ranking official in the Netherlands, accused, yet never convicted of crimes of pedophilia and also murder of at least one child, despite the plethora of evidence of his crimes and also evidence pointing towards corruption in the highest circles.) who participated in all of these crimes, and still does—would someone like he be able to come to Christ? Of course it would be possible with the power of Christ, but the question rather is, would God ever work in anyone like him? God did work in the Pharaoh during Moses' time and in the kings of Babylon and Persia, but only the latter two converted or at least changed their ways towards the people of Israel. All three definitely played big roles in the worship of pagan gods, but it is not known whether Nebuchadnezzar actively participated in these pagan rites of sexual acts with Ishtar(Footnote: This is the name used in Babylon for the moon-goddess worshipped in their religion. In the Canaanite cult she was named Ashtoreth. See also https://www.biblestudytools.com/encyclopedias/isbe/ashtoreth.html. In Judges 6 the pole that Gideon chopped down was called an Asherah fertility pole. All of these names, also including Astarte, refer to same goddess in inherited religions.) poles and the like although it is very likely. 
Still it seems very unlikely (to me at least) that God would ever change an evil person as that. The difference between Joris Demmink and Nebuchadnezzar is that Demmink should have been "enlightened" both by the enlightenment in the 17th century where Christianity played a role as well as by the culture in which he lives (also influenced by Christianity) where these acts of pedophilia and murder and satanic rites are looked upon as pagan and are illegal even under the secular (Dutch) law, and hence these things are done in the dark, while most surely all three aforementioned kings did all these out in the open, and perhaps even literally so during the sex orgies at Ishtar's fertility ceremonies #todo/opzoeken . So Nebuchadnezzar's conscience in that sense was a lot cleaner than that of Demmink. 

*20 for you were bought with a price. So glorify God in your body.*

Now comes the question *why* we need to do all this. The answer should already be known, for it is because of God's sacrifice for us. We were bought with a price, which means that we are valuable, otherwise God would not have paid for it(Footnote: Even though He, that is Jesus, paid no one, but He paid Himself by inflicting harm on Himself on the cross in the body and spiritually by #todo/opzoeken/engels absorbing the wrath of the Father on Himself.). 
Now our way to glorify Him is through our moral actions, which are both in the mind as well as *with* our body, the latter meaning the things we do for others, with our hands so to speak. But even *in* our body we can and have to glorify God, with what we eat, how we take care of it, but also by what we join it with.

#biblestudy/devotionals/1corinthians

