# John 7 (ESV) 
***Jesus at the Feast of Booths***
*1 After this Jesus went about in Galilee. He would not go about in Judea, because the Jews were seeking to kill him. 2 Now the Jews' Feast of Booths was at hand. 3 So his brothers said to him, “Leave here and go to Judea, that your disciples also may see the works you are doing. 4 For no one works in secret if he seeks to be known openly. If you do these things, show yourself to the world.”*

Jesus' brothers made a few wrong assumptions here. First, Jesus purpose was not **so that His disciples**, either the twelve or the others, would **see [His] works**. They had already seen His miracles. Second, Jesus did not **[seek] to be known openly**. Rather yet, He wanted to stay in secret because His **time [had] not yet fully come**, and even when it had come, He showed His miracles only to a select few. He did not show this in Capernaum ( #todo/opzoeken of Nazareth, a prophet in his own town ... ) and not to some of the Jews. #todo/opzoeken Some Jews said: "Show us a miracle", but I am not sure whether they asked that because they had seen Jesus's previous miracles and thought they did not prove His Messiah-ship, or whether they merely wanted to see another miracle, or that they really had not seen any miracle. It could likely have been the latter, for Jesus did not want their hearts and ears to be opened (cf. Isaiah #todo/opzoeken/reference ). 

*5 For not even his brothers believed in him. 6 Jesus said to them, “My time has not yet come, but your time is always here. 7 The world cannot hate you, but it hates me because I testify about it that its works are evil. 8 You go up to the feast. I am not going up to this feast, for my time has not yet fully come.” 9 After saying this, he remained in Galilee.*

Even Jesus' brothers, who had lived with Him for, assumingly, quite a considerate amount of time, did not believe Him, even though He had shown His whole life to be obedient to God, truthful, merciful, smarter and wiser than any other person. They should have at least have high respect for such a person, but their response in vv.3-4 seems as if they were mocking Him. Perhaps the "if" in v.4 is not a statement concerning a possibility in time, such as "when" Jesus would do this, but should rather be interpreted as: #composed/bible/john
> If You are really able to do this, show Yourself to the world.   

Why can the world not hate Jesus' brothers? It hates Jesus because He testitifies about its evil works. So this would mean that Jesus' brothers do not do that and rather testify about the good works of the world. And the world cannot hate those who are on their side. 
**Example.** #tags/politics It is just like the young Democrat congresswoman Alexandra Occasio-Cortez who speaks out her mind on Twitter and on other platforms, saying all kinds of irrational things, that are factually incorrect and which the Democrats are not even behind. No one, however, attacks her. They all hate her, but no one can do anything against her, or otherwise it would seem that their party has internal conflicts and that would damage the party's image. 
Are we really so bad then that the world cannot hate us? We definitely were before we were born again. But after Jesus had chosen us—and after we had accepted Him—the world started hating us as well (cf. John 15:18-20). 

*10 But after his brothers had gone up to the feast, then he also went up, not publicly but in private. 11 The Jews were looking for him at the feast, and saying, “Where is he?” 12 And there was much muttering about him among the people. While some said, “He is a good man,” others said, “No, he is leading the people astray.” 13 Yet for fear of the Jews no one spoke openly of him.*

In the present world of extreme polarization between Left and Right wing politics #tags/politics, where the liberal Left control the loudest mediums of speech, i.e. news, entertainment and education, and most people, even in the "Christian" world, have been influenced by them, it is taboo to speak of things the Left cannot tolerate. There is no freedom of speech in that sense, for people are not allowed to say what the think of homosexuals, transgenders and immigrants without being made out for homophobes and xenophobes or even islamophobes. It is, however, allowed and even stimulated to talk their talk and walk their walk, to speak in the way they would like to hear most, as many do on social media channels such as Twitter and YouTube. 
In v.13 no one spoke openly of Jesus, not even in a negative way, while one would expect the Jews—that is probably the Scribes and the Pharisees, as well as the priests—to be happy with any negative publicity for Jesus. The Jews may have realized that negative publicity would only put Jesus more in the spotlights, which is not what they wanted. People would hear the negative stories about Him, but it would be inevitable that claims of Jesus' miracles would surface as well. For example, one could claim that Jesus' miracle in Galilee where he multiplied the fish and bread was not true, but this would only bring up more curiosity among its listeners. If one were to research this, there would be perhaps 15.000 *first-hand* witnesses in Galilee, not to mention how many second- and third-hand testimonies there would be. This could easily turn into new myths, whether true or false, but all increasing and establishing Jesus' popularity even more.
Secondly, the Jesus were afraid to answer all of these claims, which they knew they could not rebut. They tried to diminish Jesus' work of healing a blind man (John 9) by saying that Jesus was not a prophet because He worked on a Sabbath, and when that did not work out, they claimed the healed person could not have been blind. But even after questioning him and his parents, they still did not believe (John 9:18). The question is whether they really did not believe or whether they wanted to find proof to dismiss this miracle. It is hard to believe that the Jews had not met this blind man on the streets, who had been sitting there for at least 10 years, but perhaps even 20 years, since he was "of age", which would mean he was at least 12, 18 or 30 years old according to Jewish custom. 

#todo/nogaftemaken 

*14 About the middle of the feast Jesus went up into the temple and began teaching.* 

It seems here as if the temple is a place like the agora (i.e. marketplace) where Paul was in Athens, were everyone could teach and philosophy (cf. #todo/opzoeken/reference ). I do not think that was the case in the temple courts, where teaching was much more exclusive. In Greek culture anyone could come with their own god, and the discussion was open to debate about whether this god was better than any of the Greek gods. In Jewish culture, on the other hand, the introduction of another god or the distortion of the image of Yahweh would be punishable by death. Furthermore, one could not even enter the temple, and more specifically the men's court, if he were not Jewish. So if anyone was teaching there, it would have been a Jew who was careful enough not to be dismissed by the Scribes and Pharisees who would have most likely been in the vicinity. 
Jesus did distort the image the Jews had of Yahweh, but that was because their image was wrong. Their image did not include the Son and the Holy Spirit—aside from the fact that their view on God's Law and so many other interpretations was also wrong. But Jesus based His teaching on the Word of God itself, which is never wrong. 
The Jews introduced a Talmud and #todo/opzoeken in ... when? which was even written in Babylon, where undoubtedly a lot of knowledge had gone during the 70 years. It is not even certain whether the Jews had access to the Tanakh (i.e. the Old Testament) during their stay in Babylon and Persia. Even King Cyrus did not allow the Jews to obtain a Tanakh from the treasury when Zerubbabel went back to Israel, let alone the kings before him. 
In Jesus' day, before that and still until now, the Jews base their teaching on the Old Testament *and* these additional commentaries. The Christians, however, base their words on the New Testament, which is based on the inspiration of God (2 Timothy 3:16). 

*15 The Jews therefore marveled, saying, “How is it that this man has learning, when he has never studied?” 16 So Jesus answered them, “My teaching is not mine, but his who sent me.*

Perhaps the people marveled even more when they realized that Jesus heard them, even if they were speaking softly or in themselves. They would marvel even more than that if they had seen Jesus' miracles and then they would not wonder about Jesus' learning, for it would be undoubtedly clear then that Jesus was at the least a prophet who could understand God's words.  
Jesus *had* done this miracle, which He speaks about in v.21, but I do not know to whom Jesus is speaking at this moment. If He were speaking to people who were present at the multiplication of the food, it would be strange that these people were now trying to kill Him (v.19). So most likely the current crowd had not been present at this miracle on the mount and the **one work** Jesus referred to was the one He had done prior at the Sheep's Pool in Jerusalem (John 5). 

*17 If anyone's will is to do God's will, he will know whether the teaching is from God or whether I am speaking on my own authority. 18 The one who speaks on his own authority seeks his own glory; but the one who seeks the glory of him who sent him is true, and in him there is no falsehood.*

If we apply this principle to Islam #tags/religion/islam, can we know then—based only on this principle—whether Muhammad is true? Was it clear whether Muhammad spoke **on his own authority**? In some instances it is very clear in the Qur'an that he changed ( #todo/opzoeken ) or made up rules on the spot, such as when he wanted to have sex with a woman, whose husband he had just killed, in the middle of the "street" #todo/opzoeken/reference , only minimizing the shame by asking the men who were with him to turn their backs. 
Even if he had said that he spoke with God's authority—which I remember he did not—it is clear that he sought **his own glory** for he only wanted to be gratified in his sexual desires. He definitely never said that he had to rape this woman because God commanded him to do so at this very moment. 

*19 Has not Moses given you the law? Yet none of you keeps the law. Why do you seek to kill me?” 20 The crowd answered, “You have a demon! Who is seeking to kill you?”*

Even **some of the people in Jerusalem** knew that people wanted to kill Jesus. This crowd was not ignorant, but purposely hiding the fact that they knew or even wanted to kill Jesus. Apparently they did not know yet that Jesus could read their minds. 

*21 Jesus answered them, “I did one work, and you all marvel at it. 22 Moses gave you circumcision (not that it is from Moses, but from the fathers), and you circumcise a man on the Sabbath. 23 If on the Sabbath a man receives circumcision, so that the law of Moses may not be broken, are you angry with me because on the Sabbath I made a man's whole body well? 24 Do not judge by appearances, but judge with right judgment.”*

Jesus knew that people treated the Sabbath in the wrong way and only as an **appearance** instead of as a life-giving law ( #todo/opzoeken/reference Proverbs). The Sabbath was not meant to restrict people in their freedom, but to set them free according to the freedom people have in God. Rest on one day of the week will provide a man with more energy for the rest of the week, and bring healing to the body as well. If energy and healing are both products of rest, is the healing of a sick person not even more so? If energy and healing are good, is it not even better that the lame can walk again? 
Perhaps the Jews would argue that work should not be done on the Sabbath, not even by a doctor. They are right about that, but Jesus was not working all day long, like a doctor is at his practice. Perhaps that is what He meant by doing **one work**, and perhaps the **marvel** He referred to was in a negative sense, namely that people are astonished by a teacher of the Law who crossed the Law by healing just one little thing, which was even a good thing. The people are so hypocritical, for they would not apply this same standard if their own child or cow was drowning, but if someone's child is lame or blind, they do point out the sin. 
Jesus makes clear that from the Law there are exceptions that overrule the rule of the Sabbath. Moses' law of **circumcision** is one, but the principles behind the Sabbath is another one, namely that of freedom and rest, healing and energy, and most of all, that of honoring God. 
Does this mean then that we can sacrifice our rest when we do things that honor God? This depends on whether we can honor God more or less. We should always choose for more. And if we could theoretically skip the honoring of God for one day, to get our rest, but give him back more than a double portion in the days thereafter, then it is worth it. 
Of course #todo/nogaftemaken this is not possible, because even in our rest we honor God, with prayer and the reading of His Word. 

***Can This Be the Christ?***
*25 Some of the people of Jerusalem therefore said, “Is not this the man whom they seek to kill? 26 And here he is, speaking openly, and they say nothing to him! Can it be that the authorities really know that this is the Christ?*

Some of the people knew or had heard that the authorities wanted to kill Jesus, but now they did not do anything. This caused these people to think about why the authorities did not do anything. One possibility is that Jesus really was the Christ, another is that he is not, but that the authorities did not want to capture Him because the people believed in Him and would rebel if He were to get caught. In the first case, this would be confirmation that Jesus is the Christ, if even the authorities, who were so prideful so as not to let anyone overshadow their popularity, did not stick out a finger to capture Him. In the second case this would incriminate the authorities, for they knew that Jesus was not the Christ, but pretended to be one, and according to the Law such a person would have to indicted and executed, but they did nothing. 

*27 But we know where this man comes from, and when the Christ appears, no one will know where he comes from.” 28 So Jesus proclaimed, as he taught in the temple, “You know me, and you know where I come from. But I have not come of my own accord. He who sent me is true, and him you do not know. 29 I know him, for I come from him, and he sent me.” 30 So they were seeking to arrest him, but no one laid a hand on him, because his hour had not yet come. 31 Yet many of the people believed in him. They said, “When the Christ appears, will he do more signs than this man has done?”*

Jesus was probably speaking out v.28 sarcastically, or it would have contradicted with John 8:19. He then continues, saying that even if they knew Him, it is not about Him, because He is coming to bring message from the One Who **sent** Him, and it is this Person Whom they **do not know**. The difference between the Jews and Jesus is that Jesus *does* **know Him**. This is the first statement where Jesus claims He is more than the Jews are, and that the Jews are less. First of all, this means that Jesus claims He knows more than the Jews, which could be insulting, given that He was uneducated. But secondly, and more importantly, He is claiming that the Jews do not know God. It is one thing to say that the Jews know God less well than He does, but that they **do not [even] know** God, would be the same as to claim they are not even Jews. This could possibly be compared to saying this to a Muslim, and perhaps not just any, but even a devout one. 
The second statement Jesus made was that Jesus **[came] from Him** and that He was **sent** by God. It is of the utmost importance that everyone believes this for that was Jesus' purpose here on Earth and only *after* He had finished this, He was prepared to be glorified (John 17).  

***Officers Sent to Arrest Jesus***
*32 The Pharisees heard the crowd muttering these things about him, and the chief priests and Pharisees sent officers to arrest him. 33 Jesus then said, “I will be with you a little longer, and then I am going to him who sent me. 34 You will seek me and you will not find me. Where I am you cannot come.” 35 The Jews said to one another, “Where does this man intend to go that we will not find him? Does he intend to go to the Dispersion among the Greeks and teach the Greeks? 36 What does he mean by saying, You will seek me and you will not find me,’ and, ‘Where I am you cannot come’?”*

This too seems to be a perfect reflection of what Jesus says in the High Priestly prayer (John 17:11). This too is one of the things that needed to happen, before Jesus was fully glorified, which happened at His Resurrection. The place where He went to was the place of the dead, the *hades* in Apostolic Creed (see also notes on #todo/opzoeken/reference 1 Corinthians 15:3. The text does not use the word "hades" here but simply mentions that "Christ died") or also called underworld. Of course it was possible to "follow" Jesus in one sense by also dying and going to that same place, but I think this is a figure of speech, as in "you cannot follow me where I go to". #todo/nogaftemaken  #todo/opzoeken/reference  did Jesus say this before His death and then Peter denied Him? 

#todo/nogaftemaken  de rest van het hoofdstuk bekijken voor nog meer reflecties van Johannes 17. See also v.18 where Jesus sought God's glory (cf. John 17:4). #church/material/sermon

***Rivers of Living Water***
*37 On the last day of the feast, the great day, Jesus stood up and cried out, “If anyone thirsts, let him come to me and drink. 38 Whoever believes in me, as the Scripture has said, Out of his heart will flow rivers of living water.’” 39 Now this he said about the Spirit, whom those who believed in him were to receive, for as yet the Spirit had not been given, because Jesus was not yet glorified.*

Note that **Jesus [...] cried out** and did not speak softly here. This is so important that it needs to be cried out. I admire the people crying out this message on the streets, proclaiming the Gospel and God's salvation for everyone who believes in Him. It is so necessary that everyone hears it. I almost know for sure that everyone has heard it, but has not understood it either. Children with unbelieving parents, but on a Christian school, have heard the Gospel at least eight times in elementary school, but hardly anyone remembers the message, let alone understand it. 
So for this reason people need to hear it again, and when they are on the streets, they will hear it, for some every week, if they visit the same market every week and encounter the same preacher there. But for some this is merely a story and they have decided not to pay any attention to it. So no matter how many times they hear it, they do not take it seriously. 
But the message is preached to those who do listen and believe. So even if Jesus cries out and it reaches only the ears of one person, it is worth the effort. And we see in the next pericode that at least a few people realized that Jesus is the Prophet or the Christ.

***Division Among the People***
*40 When they heard these words, some of the people said, “This really is the Prophet.” 41 Others said, “This is the Christ.” But some said, “Is the Christ to come from Galilee? 42 Has not the Scripture said that the Christ comes from the offspring of David, and comes from Bethlehem, the village where David was?” 43 So there was a division among the people over him. 44 Some of them wanted to arrest him, but no one laid hands on him.*

The **so** in v.43 is a conclusion of the differences in throughts in the previous verses, which were about trivial things concerning where the Christ was to come from. Is this the reason why there was division? Or was the division about Jesus being a good teacher, but that he could not be the Messiah because of His #todo/opzoeken/engels afkomst? Niet heritage, want dat is van welke familie Hij komt, maar van welke streek.
Division in small things lead to consequences as big as wanting to arrest someone. Would they have arrested Jesus if everyone agreed Jesus was merely a madman who lied about being the Christ? Probably not. If there were some following them, the crowd would probably have stopped Jesus, but mostly for reasons of protecting the naive people believing in Him. But as soon as their *fellowmen* started believing in Him, this hurt their egos, for this would mean that the followers of Jesus were right and they were wrong—and no one wants to be wrong. So their cognitive dissonance kicks in and they start arguing for the sake of their own egos and pride, leading to more frustrations and anger when they cannot convince the other party. This is how small things lead to big matters.

*45 The officers then came to the chief priests and Pharisees, who said to them, “Why did you not bring him?” 46 The officers answered, “No one ever spoke like this man!”*

What was described about Jesus' actions of shouting out loud that people should come to Him for **rivers of living water** in vv.37-38 might seem like people would think Jesus is mad, but the opposite is true. In v.40 we see that some (this could be quite a few people) believed He was the Prophet or even the Messiah, and now here in v.45 even officers of the chief priests were so astonished by Jesus' words that they could not arrest Him. 

*47 The Pharisees answered them, “Have you also been deceived? 48 Have any of the authorities or the Pharisees believed in him? 49 But this crowd that does not know the law is accursed.”*

The Pharisees were not there to listen to His words, but judge from afar. They were are also not there to see the leper and the blind man being healed. Perhaps they had not heard anything of Jesus all but by hearsay, except for those moments described in the Bible, where they heard only part of what Jesus said, and out of context, such as when Jesus said that He would rebuild the Temple in three days. This is probably also why they could not find anyone who could recognize Jesus among His disciples and needed Judas for that, and also why it was so hard to find witnesses during Jesus' trial, and at the end of the trial, the last and only piece of "testimony" they could bring up was the aforementioned statement. 

*50 Nicodemus, who had gone to him before, and who was one of them, said to them, 51 “Does our law judge a man without first giving him a hearing and learning what he does?” 52 They replied, “Are you from Galilee too? Search and see that no prophet arises from Galilee.”*

Regardless of whether Nicodemus was a good man or a representative of the Pharisees, meant to lure out Jesus into saying things that would incriminate Him, it seems that He is a man of integrity, following the Law with good intentions, and now #todo/opzoeken/engels het opnemen for Jesus. 

[THE EARLIEST MANUSCRIPTS DO NOT INCLUDE 7:53–8:11.]

There is quite a debate about whether this part (just like Mark should end at 16:8 or further). In my opinion this website https://www.bereanpatriot.com/whats-the-best-bible-translation-and-more-importantly-why and the links it refers to explain it all and leave out all counterarguments.
What is still unclear though, and where the author of this website might be in the minority, is that whether these parts of which it is not certain whether these are part of the Biblical canon, should be in written in the Bible. There are multiple arguments why people like John MacArthur (and Mike Winger) think they should, but it all boils down to this argument (cited from *MacSBNnkjv*)
> (MacArthur Study Bible Notes, NKJV) Since, in spite of all these considerations of the likely unreliability of this section, it is possible to be wrong on the issue, and thus, it is good to consider the meaning of this passage and leave it in the text [...].  
There is of course the warning at the end of Revelation where the punishment for leaving out is worse than that for adding. It seems like that is exactly what has been done with most Bibles (except for the (N)KJV), sometimes even for the LSB, unfortunately, such as in the case of the Johannine Comma (i.e. 1 John 5:7-8) where only in the (N)KJV this has been left in, while in other translations this has been taken out. (See also [notes](bear://x-callback-url/open-note?id=2EE87B91-B19D-432F-A178-F4B2FB433FA5-544-0000CE22C05D4EE0) there.) 
However, one should not create a version of the Bible out of fear, but rather out of what one thinks and believes resembles the autograph (that is the original version of the Bible) best. 
In light of all this, I agree with the "Berean Patriot" in that if one is convinced a part should not be in the Bible, it should not be put in a specific #todo/opzoeken/engels desbetreffende version of the Bible nor should it be preached about as if it were from the Bible. 

#todo/opzoeken juiste link over dit stuk and de YouTube'er die dit uitlegt. 


#biblestudy/devotionals/john
