# John 3 (ESV) 
***You Must Be Born Again***
*1 Now there was a man of the Pharisees named Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews.*

All commentaries, Study Bible Notes and all sermons, except for one, consider Nicodemus a person with good intention, who believes in Jesus but still has many questions concerning this *new* faith. The text says nothing about his intentions, but Nicodemus reappears in John 7:50f (where he defends Jesus) and 19:38ff, with 70 pounds of myrrh and aloe #todo/opzoeken to enbalm Jesus' body with and seems to have become part of the group that follows Jesus. 

*2 This man came to Jesus by night and said to him, “Rabbi, we know that you are a teacher come from God, for no one can do these signs that you do unless God is with him.”*

Nicodemus is speaking in the plural form here, but on whose behalf is he speaking? Is he saying that the Jews **know** that Jesus is **a teacher come from God**? That could be true. However, he could not be speaking on behalf of the Pharisees, for they did not believe this. Or maybe he was speaking for the Pharisees, but he was lying. A third explanation is that he was speaking about himself in the plural form, to indicate that there are more people like he who believe in Jesus. 

A possible argument of why Nicodemus was not the representative of the Pharisees is found in the fact that he speaks of the many **signs** Jesus has done. The unbelievers, however, both the Scribes, Pharisees, Sadducees and more, such as those from Nazareth, kept asking for a miracle. It is very probable that Jesus did not show them the miracles that the people had seen, in order to harden their hearts. The priests in the temple, for example, had already had enough evidence of Jesus' healings, for example the man who had been blind for 30 years #todo/opzoeken/reference  near the Pool of Siloam? and the man who had been crippled for #todo/opzoeken/reference where, and how many years? Though the priests had not seen the actual miracle happening, they had questioned the healed person and his parents in at least one documented case (of the blind man) but there must have been many more, for Jesus held himself by the Law which said that a healed person should show himself to the priests in the temple ( #todo/opzoeken/reference also for blindness? Not only for contagious diseases?). 
Again, however, a counterargument is that Nicodemus could have been lying, and flattering Jesus with His so-called "signs", of which they only saw the "results", but never knew whether those who showed themselves to the priests were actually sick before. 

*3 Jesus answered him, “Truly, truly, I say to you, unless one is born again he cannot see the kingdom of God.*

Even if the theory is true that Nicodemus is one of the Pharisees' representatives trying to trick Jesus into a debate and show Him that He is not the Messiah, it is clear that now Jesus has made a statement that gets Nicodemus'—seemingly genuine—attention.
Jesus' answer is not a direct response to Nicodemus' statement in v.2, but there are points at which Jesus jested (perhaps). The first thing Jesus jests with is when He says that no one can **see the kingdom of God**. This could be a response to the **we know** statement by Nicodemus. In this case, Jesus would then have meant: 
> What do you mean by "we know"? No one can know this unless he can see the kingdom of God. For a person from God is in the kingdom of God and only those who are *in* the kingdom of God can see those who are in the kingdom of God, just like humans on Earth cannot see the angels, because they live in a different realm.   
The second thing is related to this, and is perhaps jesting at anyone able to see **these signs**. Now anyone could see the healings that Jesus had done, but whether these must be interpreted as miracles or as signs requires heavenly insight, especially to see then that one is a teacher come from God. There are many false prophets who also performed miracles (#todo/opzoeken/reference I will say I did not know you), and even Jesus' disciples performed miracles ( #todo/opzoeken/reference when He sent them out), but seeing people performing those miracles does not mean they are teachers nor that they are sent from God. 

*4 Nicodemus said to him, “How can a man be born when he is old? Can he enter a second time into his mother's womb and be born?”*
*5 Jesus answered, “Truly, truly, I say to you, unless one is born of ::water and the Spirit::, he cannot enter the kingdom of God.*

Nicodemus might have been genuinely struck by Jesus' condition to be **born again**—or he could have said this sarcastically—but before Jesus answers his question, He adds another condition concerning the Kingdom of God, this time about **entering** it. Note that the first one was about *seeing* the Kingdom of God. Nicodemus might have thought that Jesus avoided his question and only added more spiritual wisdom, but the reason why Jesus mentioned his statement in v.5 is because Nicodemus asked about being *born* again. Jesus knew that Nicodemus was thinking about a different birth than He was, and so He explained that one first. However, His explanation could have caused even more questions. Nicodemus, however, did not have the chance to even ask those questions, because Jesus added more wisdom on top of that in v.8. 
In v.9 one could say Nicodemus had become totally flabbergasted. In my opinion, even if Nicodemus had ill intentions in the beginning of this conversation, a genuine interest has now gotten hold of him. 
There is a second argument here why Nicodemus did not have ill intentions, and it is seen in the way Jesus responds to Nicodemus. When Jesus responds to the Pharisees He is much harsher and stricter than He is here. Now Jesus was not strict when the adulterous woman was brought before Him, but the author #todo/opzoeken Matthew? was very clear in that the Jews were trying to trap Him. There is nothing that indicates that Nicodemus was trying to trap Jesus, except for the weak inductive argument that he came **by night** and that the other references to the night in the Gospel of John (cf. 1:5; 9:4; 11:10; 13:30) always refer to bad things. 

#todo/nogaftemaken  meaning of water and spirit 

*6 That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit. 7 Do not marvel that I said to you, ‘You must be born again.’ 8 The wind blows where it wishes, and you hear its sound, but you do not know where it comes from or where it goes. So it is with everyone who is born of the Spirit.”*

The statements about being **born again**, where the **wind blows** and "**So it is with everyone..."** in v.7-8 could be interpreted in several ways. In this context I would explain this part as follows. Nicodemus should not be surprised at the fact that he did not *understand* that Jesus said that he must **be born again**, for this is something that only believers who have the Holy Spirit can understand. And then Jesus explains that no one knows **where the wind comes from or where it goes**, meaning that it is not known when one will obtain the Holy Spirit. Nicodemus might not have the Spirit now, but he might get it later. 
This is one interpretation. Another interpretation concerning the fact that Nicodemus should not **marvel** at **"You must be born again"**, is that he should not marvel at the fact that in order to understand these things of the spiritual realm, one must be of the spiritual realm himself. And just like the wind blows and no one knows where it comes from, in the same way no one will understand those who are **born of the Spirit**. So that is why Nicodemus could not understand Jesus Who—in a certain sense—is born of the Spirit.
Another interpretation is that just like it is unknown where the wind comes from, so it is unknown where those born of the Spirit come from. That would be a strange explanation, however, and would perhaps apply to Moses, Elijah and Philip, who were taken up by the Holy Spirit, disappearing "with the wind", and as for Philip, arriving in Caesarea afterwards, as sudden as the wind. Jesus did that as well, when He walked on water. He probably did not walk the whole distance from the shore to the middle of the lake but went "with the wind". On the other hand, He could have walked and it would have taken some time, but we also see in the story #todo/opzoeken/reference that the disciples had been rowing for hours and they were but in the middle, while they should have crossed the relatively small lake even with a bad current and having the wind against them #todo/opzoeken/engels . It was as if something withheld them. These situations, however, are rare, and are probably not what Jesus meant. 
#todo/nogaftemaken *MacSBNnkjv* explanation on this part
Has nothing to do with those who are *born* of the Spirit, but with the Spirit Himself, however. Also, what does that have to do with what has been said before then? 

*9 Nicodemus said to him, “How can these things be?” 10 Jesus answered him, “Are you the teacher of Israel and yet you do not understand these things? 11 Truly, truly, I say to you, we speak of what we know, and bear witness to what we have seen, but you do not receive our testimony. 12 If I have told you earthly things and you do not believe, how can you believe if I tell you heavenly things?*

To me it is not exactly clear what Nicodemus is asking. What exactly is his question? Did he mean how one could obtain the rebirth? Or did he still not understand the concept of rebirth and how anyone could be born of the Holy Spirit?
*MacSBNnkjv* says that the phrase **water and the Spirit** should have been a clear clear reference to Ezekiel 36:24-27. The fact that Nicodemus, who was not merely *a* but **the teacher of Israel**, did not understand this indicated the spiritual bankruptcy of that time. 

#todo/nogaftemaken Here too it is necessary, as with all things in life, to start with the small things. When one cannot accomplish small matters, he will not be found faithful in large ones ( #todo/opzoeken/reference). Nicodemus had to learn from the beginning on about Who Christ was. This is ironic since (1) he was already an old man (2) he was well educated in the Bible (3) he was a leader of the nation. Jesus emphasized the need for him to be reborn, but for Nicodemus not only a spiritual rebirth was needed, but also one of his knowledge. 

*13 No one has ascended into heaven except he who descended from heaven, the Son of Man. 14 And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, so must the Son of Man be lifted up, 15 that whoever believes in him may have eternal life.*

With the first statement Jesus probably wanted to say that no one knows the truth about heaven except those who have **ascended into heaven**, and only Jesus has (Footnote: This might shed a new light on those who claim to have been to heaven before.). The second statement in v.14 is probably then not related to the first one, except for the movement of being **lifted up** (comparable to ascending). 

***For God So Loved the World***
*16 “For God so loved the world, that he gave his only Son, that whoever believes in him should not perish but have eternal life.* #biblestudy/memorization

The **Son of Man** had to die so **that** we could have **eternal life**. The reason why is explained here, and it is because **God so loved the [people in this] world**. He loves them **so** much that **he gave his only Son**. The **that** that comes after indicates the purpose of Jesus' death. However, note that it does not indicate that He died so that more people will believe in Him—even though this might be true, because His death, and resurrection, is what we can use as proclamation in our evangelisation. But here it says that **whoever believes in him** can **have eternal life** for *only one reason* and that is because Jesus died for us. If Jesus had not died, anyone who believed in (and, by definition also, followed) Jesus would still **perish** and not have eternal life. God **gave his only Son** for those who believe in Him or *will* believe in Him. 
So in other words, His death rendered it possible for us to come Him. 

#todo/nogaftemaken 
But even more than that—aside from the death of His Son, God went out of His way to "search" us.
* God set events in such a way that we would come to know Christ 
	* We were born in a place 
	* And met the right people to tell us the gospel
	* and had the opportunity to get a Bible in our hands
	* with the liberty of obtaining and possessing one
* God touched our hearts to be curious for His Word
* God touched our hearts in order to have our conscience speaking to us 
* Debatable: God moves us in such a way that we should repent
* God has given us faith in Him 
* God gives us power through His Holy Spirit in order to "sanctify ourselves"

*17 For God did not send his Son into the world to condemn the world, but in order that the world might be saved through him. 18 Whoever believes in him is not condemned, but whoever does not believe is condemned already, because he has not believed in the name of the only Son of God. 19 And this is the judgment: the light has come into the world, and people loved the darkness rather than the light because their works were evil. 20 For everyone who does wicked things hates the light and does not come to the light, lest his works should be exposed. 21 But whoever does what is true comes to the light, so that it may be clearly seen that his works have been carried out in God.”*

As opposed to the wicked things which man does not want to be shown, the good things that the humble does not want to show others, will come to light. Furthermore, the purpose of this is so that it **may be clearly seen** by others that these **works have been carried out in God**. It is very important to let other know that if they see anything good of us—which we should never promote (cf. Matthew 6)—that it is carred out **in God**. So if there is any honor for us, we should let them know that all honor is due to God. The power was from God and the purpose was for God.

***John the Baptist Exalts Christ***
*22 After this Jesus and his disciples went into the Judean countryside, and he remained there with them and was baptizing. 23 John also was baptizing at Aenon near Salim, because water was plentiful there, and people were coming and being baptized 24 (for John had not yet been put in prison).*

Even though John had already met Jesus and was aware of His mission and His Person, he was still accepting new students and not passing all of them to Jesus. He did not stop **baptizing** them even though he knew his baptism was not sufficient to enter the kingdom of God whose coming he himself was proclaiming. 
John, in a sense, was Jesus' disciple as well and more disciples were needed to spread the Gospel, or better said, at that time, the first few steps of the Gospel, which are the understanding of one's sin and the need for conversion. 
John did preparatory work and although not everyone ended up at Jesus directly, such as John and James, we do see the fruits through the thousands of new believers at Pentecost—who might have heard the gospel of John the Baptist already—as well as through people such as Apollos ( #todo/opzoeken/reference ) who himself was already making new disciples

*25 Now a discussion arose between some of John's disciples and a Jew over purification.*



*26 And they came to John and said to him, “Rabbi, he who was with you across the Jordan, to whom you bore witness—look, he is baptizing, and all are going to him.” 27 John answered, “A person cannot receive even one thing unless it is given him from heaven. 28 You yourselves bear me witness, that I said, I am not the Christ, but I have been sent before him.’ 29 The one who has the bride is the bridegroom. The friend of the bridegroom, who stands and hears him, rejoices greatly at the bridegroom's voice. Therefore this joy of mine is now complete. 30 He must increase, but I must decrease.”*

The phrase where one's **joy** is **complete** must be some kind of Hebrew way of expressing things. Paul and John use this expression in #todo/opzoeken/reference and 1 John 1:4 (and in 1 John 2 as well). In both cases Paul and John wanted their readers to do "one" more thing, which was the complete obedience to God's commandments. We might say that here, too, John, the author, speaking his mind through John the Baptist's actions, wants John the Baptist's disciples to be complete his joy by obeying this last commandment, which is to become humble. Jesus **must increase** and we **must decrease**. 
We need to be content with what we have received from heaven. John the Baptist was not jealous of the fact that he never performed any miracles, or that his disciples went away to follow Jesus (and seemingly did not even say goodbye to thank him), and that Jesus was younger than he was. Even more so, Jesus never received a formal education and John the Baptist did not have any proof of Jesus' authority. These two points John must have accepted purely on the basis of the words of the Holy Spirit. Perhaps he himself had faced this struggle as well, when those sent by the Pharisees #todo/opzoeken or Scribes, asked him questions. But it is one thing to accept one's authority given to him from heaven, but another thing to submit to this person and lose one's disciples to him as well! 
In a sense John the Baptist's behavior is the perfect example of how the Pharisees, Scribes and priests (that is Sadducees) should have behaved. Either asking the right questions, or listening to the Holy Spirit's words concerning Jesus' authority (and that of John the Baptist) and humble accepting the fact that they would now lose "their" followers, who never should have followed them, but whom they should have pointed towards God. 
That was their fault in the first place, they received all honor for themselves, and left little to nothing to God. That which they did give to God, were only hypocritical acts of outer appearance (cf. Matthew 6). 

*31 He who comes from above is above all. He who is of the earth belongs to the earth and speaks in an earthly way. He who comes from heaven is above all. 32 He bears witness to what he has seen and heard, yet no one receives his testimony. 33 Whoever receives his testimony sets his seal to this, that God is true.*

The one who **comes from above** is not like the one who **belongs to earth**, for the latter is like a child, who is limited to what he sees, but the one **from heaven** knows heaven *and* Earth. Heaven in this case would be like a higher dimension. Lower dimension beings would not be able to understand a higher dimension, regardless of their intelligence. Information about this higher dimension can only be received by faith which is given through the Holy Spirit (cf. Ephesians 6 #todo/opzoeken/reference ). But whoever **receives [the] testimony** of the one sent by God, shows that God is true. 
What then is proven true about God? That He exists? No, it is the promise of v.36 that is true, or in other words, He has kept it. For he who believes in the Son is of God, and he who is of God has the Spirit without measure, and because of this Spirit he can receive the testimony. 

*34 For he whom God has sent utters the words of God, for he gives the Spirit without measure. 35 The Father loves the Son and has given all things into his hand. 36 Whoever believes in the Son has eternal life; whoever does not obey the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God remains on him.*

#biblestudy/devotionals/toaddfromevernote

Perhaps one will argue that God is not righteous because **whoever believes in the Son has eternal life**, but that belief comes from the Father alone. For how could anyone believe unless he has heard or seen? Many have not heard about the stories of Jesus or heard any apologetic arguments in order to be convinced, and many have not seen the miracles of Jesus or any miracle happening in their life. Even if those arguments were true—which they are not, and we will elaborate on them below—those to whom belief has not been "given", can still **obey the Son**. If they do their best—and with that I mean their very best—to obey the Son with all of their will and strength, they *might* get very far. However, this is only speculative, for none have done their best to obey the Son, not even with, say, 80% of their strength. 
I have known unbelievers who wanted to give God a chance in their life. One person wanted this because his fiancée was (supposedly) a Christian and out of respect for her he was "open" to the Christian faith. Another wanted it because he grew up with the faith and came at one point in life where he had broken up with his girlfriend and wondered about whether there was a point to all that had happened to him. In the end, all chose their own way. One did not wait with marriage until he had fully come to faith—even though he knew the rule in Christianity that Christians are not allowed to marry unbelievers, he deliberately trespassed this. The other person was sad because of the break-up and looking for love from God, stopped looking as soon as he had a new girlfriend. He only used God for his own needs. 
Of course I have also met unbelievers who eventually became Christians, but not through obedience—for no one is disciplined enough to obey Christ with all of his heart—but only through *faith*. 
Note that I have deliberately used the word *faith* here instead of *belief* which is mentioned in v.36. #todo/nogaftemaken For it is through *belief* that one will obtain the *faith* from God. With *belief* is meant the act of believing whether something is true or not. With *faith*, however, is meant the act of acting upon what one believes and staying faithful to that belief. 
Now about faith and how this is obtained and to rebut the arguments given by opponents of God in the first paragraph. About the first argument where people have never even heard of Jesus, we know that God is righteous and will treat each according to his heart, whether they have heard of Jesus or not. About the second argument where people have never heard any apologetic arguments, the question also needs to be whether one is interested in hearing these. There often are debates between Christian apologists and defenders of the opposite stance, such as atheism. I never see any atheist with an open attitude saying that he is truly surprised about an argument and interested in hearing more about it. Of course, usually debates have a polemic character and people might have a very different attitude outside of the debate, off the record or in a different setting. Michael Shermer #tags/famouspeople/critics showed a very different and pleasing side of himself in an interview with Dennis Prager and Dave Ruben, for example. Still, however, this was not an open attitude where he was longing for the answer to the question of whether God existed. He, like Lawrence Krauss #tags/famouspeople/critics, who also showed a softer and more pleasing side of himself in a one-sided interview with Ray Comfort #tags/famouspeople/christian —where the latter was only allowed to ask questions—still was not open to the fact that God might exist and that even if He did, He would have anything to with him or that he *wanted* to have anything to do with God.
#todo/nogaftemaken  


#todo Elbert vertellen over: difference between belief and faith
Opzoeken wat werkelijk het verschil is. 

#biblestudy/devotionals/john

