# John 18 (ESV) 
***Betrayal and Arrest of Jesus***
*1 When Jesus had spoken these words, he went out with his disciples across the brook Kidron, where there was a garden, which he and his disciples entered.*

See also this note [[Thoughts on the brook Kidron — Gedachten over de beek Kedron]].

*2 Now Judas, who betrayed him, also knew the place, for Jesus often met there with his disciples. 3 So Judas, having procured a band of soldiers and some officers from the chief priests and the Pharisees, went there with lanterns and torches and weapons. 4 Then Jesus, knowing all that would happen to him, came forward and said to them, “Whom do you seek?” 5 They answered him, “Jesus of Nazareth.” Jesus said to them, “I am he.” Judas, who betrayed him, was standing with them. 6 When Jesus said to them, “I am he,” they drew back and fell to the ground. 7 So he asked them again, “Whom do you seek?” And they said, “Jesus of Nazareth.” 8 Jesus answered, “I told you that I am he. So, if you seek me, let these men go.” 9 This was to fulfill the word that he had spoken: “Of those whom you gave me I have lost not one.” 10 Then Simon Peter, having a sword, drew it and struck the high priest's servant and cut off his right ear. (The servant's name was Malchus.) 11 So Jesus said to Peter, “Put your sword into its sheath; shall I not drink the ::cup:: that the Father has given me?”*

This cup was the figurative cup containing the wrath of God (Footnote: See Jeremiah 25:15-16; Isaiah 51:17, 22; Lamentations 4:21; Ezekiel 23:28-34; Habakkuk 2:16) for all of humanity's sin (or interpreted by some, only of those elected by God). We should note here that only a few hours ago Jesus shared His cup with His disciples, which they eventually shared with the Christians and so on during the remembrance of the Holy Supper. Jesus' cup contained His blood, flowing because of the righteous of God, as a payment in our stead. When we drink we accept this payment and we confirm our earlier made covenant (see Matthew 26:27) with Jesus Christ that He gave His life for ours and that we give our lives to Him as well and accept Him as our Lord and Savior. 
The cup that we drink, then, does not contain the wrath of God, but rather the opposite of it. The cup that Jesus drank would be like poison which made Jesus bleed, but Jesus' blood would be like the antidote of this poison, which Jesus could only give because He had already taken the poison—somewhat similar to how a vaccine works. 
It is through His blood then that we have received life (see Romans 5:9). The cup did not drink of this cup that He shared after dinner—we do not read this anywhere in the Gospel (see e.g. Luke 22:19)—because it symbolically contained His own blood, but Jesus would later Himself drink from the cup of wrath as depicted in Jeremiah 25:15. 

***Jesus Faces Annas and Caiaphas***
*12 So the band of soldiers and their captain and the officers of the Jews arrested Jesus and bound him. 13 First they led him to Annas, for he was the father-in-law of Caiaphas, who was high priest that year.*

Generations of High Priests had been corrupt. Annas, who himself had been a High Priest, apparently was in the position of nominating the people he wanted to be High Priest, which happened at least six times we know of through his five sons and his son-in-law. Perhaps even the other High Priests were nominated by him as well. It is remarkable that the Sadducees were in power for such a long time and that the Pharisees did not get a chance to become High Priest (as far as I know). Both were bad but at least some of the Pharisees converted and believed in Christ, such as Paul, Nicodemus, Josephus of Arimathea and later on in Acts we see some of the Pharisees siding with Paul when he speaks of the resurrection of the dead. 
This to me seems like corruption on the highest level, in the Supreme Court, which should contain the most honorable men of all places! Even in the United States #tags/politics where the election in 2016 (unsuccessfully) and 2020 (unfortunately, successfully) were rigged, the Supreme Court has almost always stayed at least partially unbiased or at least not obviously Democratic.

*14 It was Caiaphas who had advised the Jews that it would be expedient that one man should die for the people.*

Caiaphas himself unknowingly prophesied the truth and plan of God in John 11:50, although he meant that Jesus should die to save the Jews from the Romans, while God meant that Christ should die to save the world from their own sin and from the wrath of God. 
Granted, some things were kept a mystery until the right time it was revealed by God, but Caiaphas was wrong about many things that he could and should have known as a High Priest and scholar (assuming the High Priest should have at least that level of education and not only the Pharisee Scribes). He should have known that it was man's own sin that caused God to pour out His wrath on both the Jews and the Gentiles and that no sacrifice, accept that of heart-felt atonement paired with fasting and mourning, could possibly turn God's heart. 

***Peter Denies Jesus***
*15 Simon Peter followed Jesus, and so did another disciple. Since that disciple was known to the high priest, he entered with Jesus into the courtyard of the high priest, 16 but Peter stood outside at the door. So the other disciple, who was known to the high priest, went out and spoke to the servant girl who kept watch at the door, and brought Peter in. 17 The servant girl at the door said to Peter, “You also are not one of this man's disciples, are you?” He said, “I am not.”*

The way in which servant girl's question is translated seems as if she expects him not to be a disciple of Jesus, but is merely confirming whether Peter is, for she would not want to allow any supporters of a plaintiff while a hearing is going on. The form of this question would only encourage Peter to deny Jesus and perhaps due to fear, even without realizing it, Peter answered bluntly. I would expect that in most cases where a question is asked in this way: "You don't belong to that group, do you?" a person would answer negatively, because that attracts the least attention. Having said something like: "Well, actually I do" would cause a suprise response on the questioner's side and his access to the courtyard would have probably been blocked as well as the other disciple's. Nonetheless, Peter is assumed full responsibility over his answers and actions. It was never Peter's job to save Jesus or to spy on the process. It never even seemed that Peter saw anything of what happened during the hearing anyway, so what was the purpose then of sneaking into this courtyard? 

*18 Now the servants and officers had made a charcoal fire, because it was cold, and they were standing and warming themselves. Peter also was with them, standing and warming himself.*

This verse seems to indicate that Peter was doing just like the others were doing. Sure it was cold, but a real soldier of Christ will not join the other party merely because it is cold and risking to expose his real identity. #church/material

***The High Priest Questions Jesus***
*19 The high priest then questioned Jesus about his disciples and his teaching.*

This is not the official High-Priest, Caiaphas, but the High-Priest Emeritus Annas, as shown in v.24. 

*20 Jesus answered him, “I have spoken openly to the world. I have always taught in synagogues and in the temple, where all Jews come together. I have said nothing in secret. 21 Why do you ask me? Ask those who have heard me what I said to them; they know what I said.” 22 When he had said these things, one of the officers standing by struck Jesus with his hand, saying, “Is that how you answer the high priest?” 23 Jesus answered him, “If what I said is wrong, bear witness about the wrong; but if what I said is right, why do you strike me?” 24 Annas then sent him bound to Caiaphas the high priest.*

John has a specific purpose for including this part of the hearings in his Gospel, even though materially it seemingly adds hardly anything to the story. Annas has barely said anything and Jesus is again sent to another court, that of his son-in-law. 
What it does tell us, although this is perhaps mentioned in the other Gospels as well, #todo/opzoeken is that the Jewish priests are performing unlawful actions in so many ways. They do not have a formal arrest warrant for Jesus, they have an informal hearing in the middle of the night, the question the defendant, which may have been illegal (see *MacSBNnkjv* notes) and they strike Jesus, let alone the fact that it was for no good reason. 

***Peter Denies Jesus Again***
*25 Now Simon Peter was standing and warming himself. So they said to him, “You also are not one of his disciples, are you?” He denied it and said, “I am not.” 26 One of the servants of the high priest, a relative of the man whose ear Peter had cut off, asked, “Did I not see you in the garden with him?” 27 Peter again denied it, and at once a rooster crowed.*

Peter caused his own demise by staying among the servants and officials for too long, which causes them to recognize him by the light and to remember the events that had just happened. 
Even though Christians do not like to work in the dark (1 John 1:7 #todo/opzoeken ) it would have been smarter for Peter if he had stayed in the dark and in the cold so that sin could not entice him. Sometimes the dark is a good place for us. I do not mean darkness as a sinful place, but as a place where there is discomfort and loneliness for us. The persecuted Christians in North-Korea for example are living in darkness and in discomfort and in social isolation, because they cannot trust anyone with their real identity. But that is still a better place than the warm place where Peter was and where one can be recognized as the disciple of Christ. #church/material

#todo/opzoeken  Why is there a different account of people who spoke to Peter in Matthew 26:69? Two servant girls and a group of bystanders 
Peter also responds differently there. 

***Jesus Before Pilate***
*28 Then they led Jesus from the house of Caiaphas to the governor's headquarters. It was early morning. They themselves did not enter the governor's headquarters, so that they would not be defiled, but could eat the Passover.*

There is no description of what happened in Caiaphas' house in the Gospel of John (but see Matthew 26:57-68 for the account), but a few hours had gone by then, for it was early morning by the time they went to the governor's headquarters. Also, we know that by the time Jesus was brought to Annas' house it was cold, so that must have been deep in the night then, for in the early morning temperatures in Jerusalem rise quickly. Second, the rooster had already crowed at least once. Now there is a possibility that the rooster crowed through divine intervention, which then could have happened at any hour of the day, whether during the day or the night, but setting that option aside, we know that the first time the rooster crowed, was around 3AM, which is the end of the third wake of night. 

*29 So Pilate went outside to them and said, “What accusation do you bring against this man?” 30 They answered him, “If this man were not doing evil, we would not have delivered him over to you.” 31 Pilate said to them, “Take him yourselves and judge him by your own law.” The Jews said to him, “It is not lawful for us to put anyone to death.” 32 This was to fulfill the word that Jesus had spoken to show by what kind of death he was going to die.*

The Jews wanted to kill Jesus and could have done so in many ways, although the only legal way was to let the Romans do it. The Romans, however, had many ways of killing a person, not only through crucifixion. Earlier the Jews wanted to stone Jesus in Nazareth and push Him off a cliff, but neither those nor other attacks on Jesus succeeded, not only because it was not His time yet, but also because it was not the method through which He was to die. Now at the right time Jesus was to die, it would not have been very hard to allow this prophecy to come true, because the Jesus wanted to kill Him at any given day. So the day Jesus would turn Himself over, or allow Judas to betray Him, would be the day He died. The method, however, was up to the Jews and it would be those who asked Pontius Pilate for death by crucifixion. 
Adding to that, Pontius Pilate could have refused. He estimated, and perhaps hoped so as well, that the flogging of Jesus would be sufficient. As a matter of fact, the act of flogging itself would have been enough to kill Him depending on how harsh or merciful the executioner #todo/opzoeken/engels flogger was or how resistant Jesus was. After this flogging the Jews had seen Jesus and anyone who had seen Him would have thought that this man would not survive for a few more hours. Unfortunately though the Jews were not satisfied yet and wanted Jesus dead, the sooner the better, without any possibility for Him to survive, which was likely, from the wound of the flogging. So without knowing they fulfilled the prophecy. 
Had they read their Bibles better, they would have known that Isaiah 53 already predicted the crucifixion and with every action they took against Jesus, even the paying of the silver to Judas, they fulfilled the Word even more. Had they let Jesus stay alive and not done any of what they did, then the prophecies would not have come true. 
Even the Satan fell for this trap of God, or better said, he fell in the hole he dug for another—and even this proverb was written in the Bible. 
So we can conclude that even those who can read the Bible—and the Satan has read this for thousands of years—will not understand it unless God shows it to them. 

***My Kingdom Is Not of This World***
*33 So Pilate entered his headquarters again and called Jesus and said to him, “Are you the King of the Jews?” 34 Jesus answered, “Do you say this of your own accord, or did others say it to you about me?”*

Jesus was not afraid to boldly answer Pilate and to even answer his question with a question, just as he did with Annas, regardless of their position. To Jesus these men were not the authority. He created them, He gave them these positions, He knew them even before they were born (see Psalm 139). Rather yet, it is Pilate and the (High-)Priests who do not recognize Jesus' authority. If Jesus had not obeyed any Jewish or Roman rule that would even have been understandable, because He is above the Law. 
Can you imagine with what perspective Jesus looked at this world? He had nothing to be afraid of. Physically, because He could cure any disease in an instant. He could make huge amounts of bread out of a little bit bread and turn water into wine, although He most certainly could have created all of these without anything to begin with. Emotionally He was stable as well, He had nothing to fear of for He had His Father watching over Him and more than twelve legions of angels, where a single one could kill more than 185.000 soldiers in one night (see 2 Kings 19:35). 

*35 Pilate answered, “Am I a Jew? Your own nation and the chief priests have delivered you over to me. What have you done?”*

Pilate does not answer Jesus either. It seems like they are evading each other's questions by asking questions themselves, but it is not clear why. Jesus' questions is simple: "Are you asking me if I'm the king of the Jews because you think I am or did you merely hear others say that about me?" Pilate could have simply responded with "the latter" but instead he asks the rhetorical question "Am I a Jew?" which of course he is not, meaning "of course I do not think you are my king". Perhaps he did not want to insult Jesus, which is highly unlikely, or perhaps he did think that Jesus was more than a normal person, especially because his wife had a dream about Him #todo/opzoeken was this before the trial or between the trials that she told her husband about this? 
So instead of answering that question with "well, I do think there is something special about you" which could lead to all kinds of problems for him such as his allegiance to the emperor, or lying straight to His face, which Pilate perhaps could not do with a straight face, He just evaded the question in this way. 

 and then adding to that "and neither do the Jews think so, because they handed you over to me. What have you done that upset them so much to have you killed?"
Pilate's 

*36 Jesus answered, “My kingdom is not of this world. If my kingdom were of this world, my servants would have been fighting, that I might not be delivered over to the Jews. But my kingdom is not from the world.” 37 Then Pilate said to him, “So you are a king?” Jesus answered, “You say that I am a king.*

Jesus never mentioned the word "king" nor did He say He was a king. Jesus merely said "My kingdom". I suppose Jesus meant here that the fact that He mentions He has a kingdom does not imply that He is a king. To Pilate that is the only option, but he did not consider that gods have kingdoms as well. I think that Jesus did not want to confirm Pilate's answer by saying: "Yes, I am a king" because that would confirm Pilate's impression of a worldly king, and Jesus is not one of those. 
It is just like when believers do not always want to say that we are Christians, when people have an image of Orthodox or traditional Catholics for example. In those case we could say we are Protestant, or newborn Christians. These terms, however, have been defiled as well by nominal Christians and people who thought they were Christian and then went off the path. I would like to use the term "real Christians" but others would find that too judging towards other believers and the focus would then be more on what gives me the right to say something about them than on the fact that I am merely trying to state something about myself and about what I believe.
Jesus probably also did not want to answer him directly as in: "No, I am not a king. I am a god and I am *the* God of the universe. God of all gods, even of the Romans gods." What would Pilate's response have been then? Rather yet, Jesus emphasizes his purpose, in which He also claims He is the King, ruler of all, but Lord of those who listen to His voice.

*For this purpose I was born and for this purpose I have come into the world—to bear witness to the truth. Everyone who is of the truth listens to my voice.” 38 Pilate said to him, “What is truth?”*

Note that not a single out of the five questions in this part is answered straightforwardly. Perhaps John wants to indicate the confusion here in the communication between the two. Jesus of course understands everything, but He refuses to speak in plain terms, as He often does because His words are meant for those who can hear and are open to God. 
Jesus' answer to this last question of Pilate is even left out of the text completely or perhaps Jesus thought it was not necessary to answer this question as Pilate should know, logically and intuitively, what the truth was, without being too philosophical.

*After he had said this, he went back outside to the Jews and told them, “I find no guilt in him. 39 But you have a custom that I should release one man for you at the Passover. So do you want me to release to you the King of the Jews?” 40 They cried out again, “Not this man, but Barabbas!” Now Barabbas was a robber.*

In Pilate's "good" intention, because he did not want to crucify an innocent—or because he was acting under Roman law where it was not permitted to crucify an innocent person—he thought it better to flog Jesus instead of crucifying Him. However, see [notes on John 19:4](bear://x-callback-url/open-note?id=D6C10556-0C78-4124-B1DC-68346B3F28EC-91278-000287033AE1FBC0). If Pilate was any good, he would not have allowed any flogging, mocking and striking (beating) of Jesus.
On the other hand, had Pilate known that the Jews wanted Jesus to be crucified anyway and that they would threaten him by telling the emperor that Pilate served Jesus as King instead of the emperor himself, he possibly would have crucified or killed Him in another way immediately, in order to let Jesus suffer as little as possible, due to his fear of losing his position. Either way, he had committed a crime now because he crucified an innocent person which the Jews could also raise up to the emperor. 
Pilate's question in verse 35 "What have you done?" indicates that he is aware that the call for His death could be due to political reasons. The answer of the Jews had already been given to him, namely that he blasphemed God and therefore should be killed. 
Apparently this did not happen very often, or perhaps it had never even happened before. The Jews solved most of their matters themselves and if they let the Romans solve this, which is only in the case of capital punishment, the Romans should at least have a valid reason to carry out the sentence. The Jews could not call for the death of an apostate, merely for rejecting the faith of Judaism, or for working on the Sabbath—both reasons would be insufficient to the Romans (is my expectation) as these were not part of the Greco-Roman culture and law—the sanctity of the Sabbath and of many of the Ten Commandments would say nothing to them. Worshipping other gods, the creation of and prostrating for statues, using God's Name in vain, not holding the Sabbath, not honoring one's parents, adultery and especially covetousness—which is in the mind—none of these trespasses would be sufficient for Romans to kill the perpetrator. To the Romans the execution of this person would be equal to killing an innocent one. 

#biblestudy/devotionals/john
#tags/bible/john
