# John 14 (ESV) 
***I Am the Way, and the Truth, and the Life***
*1 “Let not your hearts be troubled. Believe in God; believe also in me. 2 In my Father's house are many rooms. If it were not so, would I have told you that I go to prepare a place for you? 3 And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again and will take you to myself, that where I am you may be also. 4 And ::you know the way:: to where I am going.” 5 Thomas said to him, “Lord, we do not know where you are going. How can we know the way?” 6 Jesus said to him, “I am the way, and the truth, and the life. No one comes to the Father except through me. 7 If you had known me, you would have known my Father also. From now on you do know him and have seen him.”*

Thomas is asking a seemingly logical question, which Jesus had actually already answered. He already said that He would go to His Father's house. Perhaps Thomas remembered that, in which case he meant: where is the Father's house? Jesus then answered, *I am the Way*. The disciples did not *know* Jesus and hence they did not know that He was the Way and that they did not know God. They had seen a lot from Jesus, His miracles, His character but His sacrifice, they had not seen yet. They were about to in a few hours. 
One can only claim he actually *knows* Jesus when he has seen all three. Current day Christians have not seen neither of those three with their physical eyes, but they have seen Him with their spiritual eyes.

*8 Philip said to him, “Lord, show us the Father, and it is enough for us.” 9 Jesus said to him, “Have I been with you so long, and you still do not know me, Philip? Whoever has seen me has seen the Father. How can you say, ‘Show us the Father’? 10 Do you not believe that I am in the Father and the Father is in me? The words that I say to you I do not speak on my own authority, but the Father who dwells in me does his works. 11 Believe me that I am in the Father and the Father is in me, or else believe on account of the works themselves.*

Jesus is asking rhetorical questions here when He says "you still do not know me?" and "Do you not believe?" Philip actually had seen the Father already, he just did not realize that the One he saw and heard was the embodiment of the Father Himself. 
The answer, however, to the rhetorical questions is unclear to me (even though rhetorical questions by definition do not have answers, but what I mean here, is the purpose for which this rhetoric is used). Did Philip believe that Jesus was in the Father? Perhaps he did, but he did not realize that he did not have to see the Father anymore in order to realize what He was like. It would be something like reading about a woman for example, upon which the reader would want to see this person in reality. The same rhetorical question could then be asked: "Do you not believe what is said about her? Why do you want to see her then?" Except for the graphical depiction or imagination that would be lacking in the reader's mind, there would be some doubt as to what she is really like. This would indicate some doubt as to the words written about her. "Do you not believe these words then?" is what could be asked next. 
Philip did not ask to see the Father simply because He wanted to see Him with his own eyes. He wanted to see the Father's character and glory and words, and all of these were already embodied by Jesus and therefore not necessary to see once again. Even more so, the miracles Jesus had done would truly testify that what He said, was real. 

*12 “Truly, truly, I say to you, whoever believes in me will also do the works that I do; and greater works than these will he do, because I am going to the Father.*

How can anyone do a greater work than Jesus has done? If Jesus is going to the Father the only advantage is that we can do more than He has done, for those who live or serve longer than 33.5 years, which was Jesus' time on Earth before He went back to heaven. 
The only way our work could be greater than Jesus' is if we were to do the same work and do these longer than He has done. Now this is only possible if God works in us through His Holy Spirit. 
The disciples have accomplished—only in this sense—a greater work than Jesus has by having spread the Gospel to Europe and even India, where Jesus as a person has never been to. The same miracles Jesus has done, from healing the blind to raising the dead, have been done by the disciples and are still being done. 

*13 Whatever you ask in my name, this I will do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son. 14 If you ask me anything in my name, I will do it.*

Whatever one asks in Jesus Name, is done to glorify Him. Nothing may be asked that is not glorifying Jesus' Name for Jesus would never do something that takes glory away from Him. But whatever it is that is asked that glorifies Jesus, the Father will also be glorified by that. Why is that? This is because Jesus only does what glorifies the Father. So whatever we ask that glorifies Jesus, Jesus will only do this if it *also* glorifies the Father. Then the Father is glorified *by* His Son. 
So for example, suppose I ask for Jesus' Name to be exalted, suppose this would give more credit to Jesus but less to the Father, just like the credit to David took away credit from Saul, then Jesus would not let His Name be exalted. In this example no credit would be taken away from the Father because Jesus gave all credit to His Father by saying that the Son can do nothing without the Father. John 5:19 even goes one step further by stating that the Son can only do things He has already *seen* the Father doing. So anything the Son has done, the Father was already doing. It is as if the Father was already working out salvation in a person or working out the miracle, but Jesus then did *physically* while the Father did this *metaphysically*. Just like when a Christian performs a miracle, in fact he does nothing at all except for saying, for example: "Stand up!" When this man stands up then, it is God then Who has done the work, or more specifically, the Father Who willed it and the Son Who then has done the work through the Holy Spirit. 

***Jesus Promises the Holy Spirit***
*15 “If you love me, you will keep my commandments. 16 And I will ask the Father, and he will give you another Helper, to be with you forever,*

#biblestudy/theology/calvinism/osas Who can go against this argument that the Holy Spirit is **with** and *in* (see v.17) us forever? Still there are those who say the people can fall from their faith by deliberately choosing to jump out of God's hand. But why would they do that, making such an important decision, if the Holy Spirit was in them? Did the Holy Spirit not speak to them at that time? Or were they deaf to the Holy Spirit's words? Was the Holy Spirit not able to open their ears then at that time? 
If those were not willing, why would the Father have given them the Holy Spirit, knowing they would not listen to it anyway? 

*17 even the Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it neither sees him nor knows him. You know him, for he dwells with you and will be in you.*

It seems like the Spirit of truth is a different spirit, but it actually is a characteristic of the Holy Spirit Himself, or better yet a claim (see John 15:26). It is striking to see that the word for *spirit* has been translated with πνεῦμα (pneuma) here (which also means "air" in Greek), because the meaning of it becomes very clear in Chinese, which is translated as 氣 (qì). The word *qì* is used in a variety of ways, but in its most colloquial form it means "air." It could also have the following meanings among others: 
* 氣氛: the sphere (in a certain place)
* 氣質: character or attitude
* 氣: the energy flowing in one's body allowing all parts and organs to function properly.

So this word is very close to the Hebrew variant רוּחַ (ruah) and the Biblical one which encompass all three and perhaps more of the Chinese meanings, such as the "spirit of fear" in 2 Timothy 2:7. Even in French the word "sphere" is translated to "air", for example. If we then take the meaning of "the spirit of truth" to be interpreted by a Chinese and translate this without ecclesiastic terminology, this would become #composed/bible/john

> "the Father will even give you a longing and passion for the truth."   

Notice also that the world cannot receive this truth. It seems rather contradictory that one cannot receive something because he does not see nor know it. It would be for exactly that reason that one needs to receive something right? For example, I cannot and have not seen the President in real life nor do I know him, because I have never received him (in my house). 
In this case we are not talking about a person, however, but about the principle of truth which everyone **knows** or at least is familiar with, for everyone knows the difference between *true* and *false*. However, *knowing* here would be something like how Adam *knew* Eve (cf. Genesis 4:1,17,25), which was an intense form of intimacy (as a matter of fact, it was referring to having sex). The world does not have this intimacy with the truth. 
The Bible claims the world **cannot see** the truth, which makes a wonderful case for the current day Leftists. Of course they know what the word "truth" means, but they cannot see if they do not want to see it, they are not looking for it, and they do not *know* it intimately because they are constantly submerged with falsehood and lies. If one deliberately allows himself to become part of this lie, then he will not obtain this spirit of truth which is, once again, not a separate spirit, but an attitude of wanting to know the truth and be in it, just like Christians do not want to lie and when they do or see one, they want to correct and expose it. 
Those who knew truth as a principle have sought it and some have become famous apologists such as Josh McDowell, Sir William A. Ramsay, Frank Morrison and C.S. Lewis #tags/famouspeople/christian, and this process always starts with the quest for truth. 

*18 “I will not leave you as orphans; I will come to you.*

There is a difference between *being* an orphan and *being as* an orphan. There are people who were abandoned by their parents and being left as an orphan, and there are people who actually are orphans but have been adopted as children of their new parents. The latter, of course, is better than the former one. In this case when Jesus speaks of us we are, first of all, not orphans, for we have a Father in heaven, but second of all we are not even left as orphans, for even now, when Jesus is in heaven, we can have contact with Him all the time and at all times through the Holy Spirit, as explained in verse 19.

*19 Yet a little while and the world will see me no more, but you will see me. Because I live, you also will live. 20 In that day you will know that I am in my Father, and you in me, and I in you.*

So before this day both we and the disciples as well, could *not* know that Jesus was in the Father, for the **you** here is plural. This day has come for all when the Holy Spirit descended on man during Pentecost, but for some this had come even before that, as in the case of Simeon and Anna, who both had the Holy Spirit, albeit temporarily.

*21 Whoever has my commandments and keeps them, he it is who loves me. And he who loves me will be loved by my Father, and I will love him and manifest myself to him.”* #biblestudy/theology/calvinism/osas/lordship *22 Judas (not Iscariot) said to him, “Lord, how is it that you will manifest yourself to us, and not to the world?” 23 Jesus answered him, “If anyone loves me, he will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we will come to him and make our home with him. 24 Whoever does not love me does not keep my words. And the word that you hear is not mine but the Father's who sent me.*

Judas' question was about the manifestation of Jesus, why He manifests Himself only to Christians and not to the world. Jesus does not give a direct answer, but answers Him by partially repeating his previous sentence. However, note that Jesus switches the order of causality in His answer as opposed to His previous statement. He first stated that whoever keeps the commandments proves that he loves Jesus, and in His answer to Judas He states that if anyone loves Jesus, He will keep the commandments. These are not contradictory. 
Now, one can say that the Pharisees also kept the commandments (yet they did not love Jesus), but did this with the wrong intention, so Jesus' first statement would not apply to everyone. That, however, is incorrect, because the Pharisees did not keep many of the commandments. They might have abided by the Ten Commandments, but they did not love their neighbor as themself nor did they love God with all their heart, soul, mind and strength, which is not only the summary of the Ten Commandments, but are also explicitly stated as separate commandments in the Law in Deutoronomy #todo/opzoeken. 
The Pharisees clearly did not keep all the commandments as they lied about the body and that it was stolen by the disciples, how they stirred up the crowd into releasing the murderer Barabbas, knowing that he was much less worthy of a Pesach release than Jesus, not even mentioning all the other lowly attacks on Jesus and attempts to seize Him. 
It is not clear, by the way, whether Paul was guilty of these sins either, but I would have expected him to mention these if he had. He also mentions that he killed (or let these Christians be killed) and tortured all these Christians with a clear conscience #todo/opzoeken as he really believed they were following a blaspheming leader. 
Back to Judas' question and why Jesus does not manifest Himself to the world: The answer is that this is because the world does not keep His commandments. Why should He manifest Himself to those who do not even love Him? Again, one might ask how the world can get to know Jesus then if He never manifested Himself? The answer is that when people know the law and if they love it, they will love Jesus, even when they do not know Jesus Himself, like Paul. Then, Jesus will manifest Himself, again, just as He did to Paul but also to Simeon and Anna, but also to the Roman centurion whose servant was sick. 

*25 “These things I have spoken to you while I am still with you. 26 But the Helper, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, he will teach you all things and bring to your remembrance all that I have said to you.*

There are three steps in receiving wisdom or passing it over. First, the word needs to be transmitted, whether spoken or written or in another way; then it needs to be *taught*; lastly, it needs to be remembered and practiced. 
The first part is obvious of course, without receiving the words one will not receive the message. Jesus' words have therefore been written down, but also His present day words are still being transmitted through the Holy Spirit. 
The second step, however, is less obvious. Wisdom sometimes needs to be *taught*, it needs to be explained and repeated. Examples need to be given of how to apply this wisdom in several occassions. This is what the Holy Spirit does. He is this teacher and called the *Helper* here. 
The third step is remembrance, which is also done by the Holy Spirit. Any teaching is worthless if the student does not remember it, whether this is about factual knowledge or skills. The Holy Spirit helps us in our memory. Now our memory is limited and even though it is vast in size, so much so that we often do not even know we have memorized this (Footnote: although there are theories that say that human brain stores everything he has ever heard or seen, it is just not able to get it out.), the Holy Spirit can find what is needed at a given time and bring it to mind. 
The last part of verse 26 does not mention practice, but we know from Jesus' words and from the experiences of the disciples that they did not simply remember Jesus' words or the words from the Old Testament, but they did so at the right *time* and in the right *situation*. 
When I teach my child to defend himself with a certain kind of technique, which he should always remember for when people put a knife on his throat for example, then I can remind or *remember* him about it at any given time, but the real teaching is when it is practiced and when he actually gets a knife put on his throat. 

Now the Pharisees had access to the Old Testament, as well as to the oral traditions #todo/opzoeken Midrash? as well as other teachings and commentaries. They also had great teachers besides those of the Bible, so they had all three elements needed for receiving this wisdom. But in specific cases they did not have the wisdom to decide what the right answer was, such as in the case for paying taxes to the emperor and the punishing of the adulturous woman. To them, this question was a trick question because there was no correct answer. But here they missed the Holy Spirit who could have guided them with logic into finding the right answer. 
The same goes for the Corona crisis in this world. #tags/historic events/corona# Many churches have all the knowledge they need—and the memory for it is not needed for everything is stored within (digital) books and on the Internet—but they still lack the *teaching* of the Holy Spirit in order to distinguish what parts of this information can be used in their situation. 
For example, almost always churches refer to Romans 13 where Paul says Christians should obey the government unless they are disobedient to God, but is keeping a social distance of 1.5 meters and therefore the exclusion of some members in the church building a sin, because the building is not big enough for everyone? 
It is easy to discern what is right when the situation concerns a general situation for safety in case of fire, for example. The government has rules for concert halls, other events and school and church buildings for a maximum number of people inside the building, and emergency exits etc. In this case some people must be left out and miss out on hearing the Word of God that day as well as real live communion with fellow Christians. 
One could pose as an argument that fire is an actual threat, with imposed risks that have been formally calculated and experimented with over time. Corona does not have the actual risks that the news outlets propagate and #todo/opzoeken/engels angst wordt opgewekt, fear is being incited on purpose. 
Another argument is that of the perception of others, especially non-Christians, to whom Christians will give a bad example when they do not adhere to government law. This can be countered with the general rule of priority or of choosing the least worse of all options. It is bad to disobey the government and provide a bad example to unbelievers #todo/opzoeken in de Bijbel, geen verkeerd beeld geven, but it is even worse to disobey God and forsake our meetings. 
Let us then take a situation on which everyone agrees is a serious threat, such as the plague. If the government provides rules for social distancing limiting or even completely restricting the attendance of church meetings, should the church then comply with these rules? Some will say yes, because the rules are in line with the actual rate of infection and probability of death. Others, however, will still disagree, because to them the "being in line with" and "strictness of rules being proportional to the impact" are not the main arguments. It is always obedience to God that comes first. 
We can take a look at the plague in the Middle Ages #tags/historic events# where there was not an imposed social distance by the government #todo/opzoeken but people covered their mouths with handkerchiefs and stayed away from certain places. This also meant that the sick were not taken care of. It was only (or mostly) Christians #todo/opzoeken who did go out and took care of the ill and weak, risking their own lives in order to save others or at least provide them with palliative care. 
This in turn provided to be a good example to the people as opposed to the present day, which is not completely contributable to the absence of the government's social distancing laws in the Middle Ages. It is the courage that Christians showed and the love for their fellowmen. 
My argument would be why the government would not allow people such as Christians to put themselves at risk as long as they stay away from others who do not want to be put at risk? Everyone else is keeping their distance and wearing masks, and if an infected Christian goes to a supermarket for example, all others should be safe right? 

So to summarize what my personal view is of this. Obedience to God to not forsake the meetings comes first. 
* Providing an example of courage and love for one another is more important than the example of obeying the government (which is actually less courageous and even a cowardly position to take). 
* The government's rules are not proportionally to the risk of infection and probability of death, especially not along specific age groups and areas. 
* The data about risk and spread of the disease is not correct. 
* The government is specifically targeting Christians. 

*27 Peace I leave with you; my peace I give to you. Not as the world gives do I give to you. Let not your hearts be troubled, neither let them be afraid. 28 You heard me say to you, I am going away, and I will come to you.’*

There probably is a difference between leaving and giving peace. Jesus then adds to it, not the worldly way of giving, but *His* way of giving. #todo/nogaftemaken 
The world gives in many ways. There could be something conditional underlying it, meaning that the world expects something from you as well. It could also give you something so that you get hooked on it, and ultimately become a slave of it, such as in the case of addictive substances. 
Even with the best intentions, what the world gives could be unhealthy or distorted. Just take a look at a few events that happened in world history #tags/historic events#. The British gave China opium in order for the people to get addicted to this, so that they could control China and obtain her gold. 
Current day press gives the people of this world knowledge about climate change, but they have distorted the facts so that the human race should bow down to nature. The world should, according to them, stop using fossil fuels and therefore slow down the economy so that the many who are still in poverty and hunger should not be saved at the cost of saving the environment. Even thinking long-term this is a bad decision, because we are talking about small percentages of our environment to go wasted. Even if we are talking about a few fishes going extinct, what is the bad thing about that if the world wants the people to go vegan anyway? We would not need those fishes. 
What is even more hypocrite, they are calling on people to save little animals, baby animals and even eggs such as those of turtles and birds #todo/opzoeken Michael Knowles video? but they do not mind abortion of human beings. They had rather human beings are killed than animals! 

*Let not your hearts be troubled, neither let them be afraid. 28 You heard me say to you, ‘I am going away, and I will come to you.’ If you loved me, you would have rejoiced, because I am going to the Father, for the Father is greater than I.* 

"If you loved me" implies that the disciples did not really love Jesus. It could be that the condition for loving one is that one knows that other and in this case, they did not know Jesus completely. However, that is not completely true because requires us to love strangers as well as our enemies. Another explanation is that the disciples did not really love Jesus because if they did, they would have let Him do what was best for Him. If anyone leaves and goes to a better place, such as when he moves to a better house and neighborhood or leaves for a better job, would his friend or colleague who loves him not rejoice? No, they would rejoice, even if it was with sadness in their hearts. But in this case the disciples did not rejoice. 
They did not understand why Jesus had to be killed, they did not realize now was the time, they did not see the importance of all of it. But it is not the lack of understanding that Jesus mentions here, it is their lack of *love*. The disciples loved themselves more than they loved Jesus and wanted Him to be with them instead of with His Father. 

*29 And now I have told you before it takes place, so that when it does take place you may believe. 30 I will no longer talk much with you, for the ruler of this world is coming. He has no claim on me, 31 but I do as the Father has commanded me, so that the world may know that I love the Father. Rise, let us go from here.*

Jesus is not afraid of the Satan for he has no claim on Jesus and all attacks on Jesus would not harm Him with a single scratch if Jesus did not allow it. But the Father has commanded Jesus to leave Earth and go up to heaven. Jesus' love for the Father is so great that His obedience to Him is absolute. He loves the Father more than Himself and is willing to sacrifice Himself on the cross---for us humans, yes, but only because the Father asked or commanded Him to. 
So obedience and following commands has to do with loving the commander. In the army the soldiers follow the commands of their sergeant but this is not because of love. There is trust present, as there always must be in the battlefield, but in the beginning this obedience is instilled by fear of punishment and of the consequences in the field when one does not obey his leader. This obedience, however, has been drilled in and has not resulted from love. 
So obedience does not always indicate true love. The other way around, though, is always true, that is, true love for his leader always obeys the leader's commands, provided these commands are wise. A student who loves his master will not obey his master's commands to kill him if the student thinks this is wrong. There seems to be an exception in Japan where the teacher allows the student to overtake his position only when he is defeated by his student, which means the death of the teacher. However, in the Japanese honor culture, and to the student, this is not wrong and it is an act of love to them, for in this way they can grant their master's wish because they have raised a student who is better than they are. 

#biblestudy/devotionals/john
#tags/bible/john #tags/politics/abortion #tags/events/easter #tags/events/pentecost