# John 12 (ESV)
**Mary Anoints Jesus at Bethany**
*1 Six days before the Passover, Jesus therefore came to Bethany, where Lazarus was, whom Jesus had raised from the dead. 2 So they gave a dinner for him there. Martha served, and Lazarus was one of those reclining with him at table.*

The use of **so** and "therefore" is extensively. The "therefore" is explained in the verse before it, i.e. the last verse of the previous chapter. It is because the Pharisees wanted to arrest Jesus that He went to stay safe, if I may say so, at Lazarus' place. 
It is logical, of course, to give a dinner when Jesus arrives, hence the "so". Perhaps it was logical, in verse 3, that because Mary did not have to serve, since Martha was already doing so, that she could now bring her gift. 

*3 Mary therefore took a pound of expensive ointment made from pure nard, and anointed the feet of Jesus and wiped his feet with her hair. The house was filled with the fragrance of the perfume. 4 But Judas Iscariot, one of his disciples (he who was about to betray him), said, 5 “Why was this ointment not sold for three hundred denarii and given to the poor?” 6 He said this, not because he cared about the poor, but because he was a thief, and having charge of the moneybag he used to help himself to what was put into it. 7 Jesus said, “Leave her alone, so that she may keep it for the day of my burial.*

What can she **keep** #biblestudy/questions? Can she keep this ointment to anoint Him on the day of His burial? It would seem to be the right thing to do, for the day Jesus was crucified no one would think of buying it. Not even when He was judged guilty and sentenced to death would anyone have it in his right mind to buy ointment—not only out of disrespect, but also because one would not want to miss a second of everything that happened from the flogging until the crucifixion. Moreover, the very next day they did not have the opportunity to buy it, for it would be a *High* Sabbath of the oncoming Passover. See also #todo/nogaftemaken for the difference between a regular and a *high* passover (with capitals?). In that case Jesus would have to be buried without ointments and His body would decompose very quickly and unbearable to visit anymore.  #church/material/sermon
We read, however, that Joseph of Arimathea and Nicodemus bought about 75 pounds of myrrh and aloe, right after Jesus was taken down from the cross and just before the start of the Sabbath, so Mary's ointment would not be necessary anymore. 
Why would Jesus then have said the word **keep** here? The answer is perhaps that the myrrh was used to prevent the body from decomposing, while the ointment was to cover it with a scent. 

*8 For the poor you always have with you, but you do not always have me.”*

It is not always about optimizing efficiency in God's Kingdom—I am saying this while I am a prolific enthusiast of optimization—it is also about giving the right thing to the right person. Hence the concept of *fairness* is wrongly perceived by most people. Fairness does not mean that everyone gets the same treatment or reward, it means that everyone gets the same *conditions*. So, for example, women are not allowed to become elite soldiers, such as the Commandos in The Netherlands or the Delta Force or Green Berets in the Army or the SEALs in the Marines, but this applies for *every* woman. The Bible speaks about this in terms of righteousness and that each should receive his reward (see for example 2 Timothy 2:6). 
Would it be fair to give more to Jesus than to others? Definitely, He is the sole person Who died to give life to the people of this world. He deserves more credit and praise and honor from everyone. But even setting that argument aside, in this case time is the factor that Judas forgot—setting aside his real intention of keeping the money. When someone is present, at that moment, this person deserves more attention. Put otherwise, whatever attention is given to this person this is worth more than when given remotely. How much more so when one still lives and has not passed away yet?
Jesus was present here and He was about to die, so it only made sense to honor Him at this time, and so would Judas have done, had he understood Jesus' words about His oncoming death, like Mary did.

***The Plot to Kill Lazarus***
*9 When the large crowd of the Jews learned that Jesus was there, they came, not only on account of him but also to see Lazarus, whom he had raised from the dead. 10 So the chief priests made plans to put Lazarus to death as well, 11 because on account of him many of the Jews were going away and believing in Jesus.*

The chief priests realized that the Resurrection was what motivated the people to believe in Jesus, hence they tried to kill Lazarus. Remarkably, it is not written in the Gospels that they tried to kill Jesus after His resurrection. Perhaps the chief priests #biblestudy/questions why plural? Isn't there only one? 
actually thought that this time they would not succeed in killing Jesus, for they knew for sure that He had died on the cross. This could only mean that He had really resurrected and one who has resurrected, cannot be killed anymore. Once again, perhaps this is what they *thought*. The priests were not aware of the many others who also rose from the dead during the earthquake at the moment of Jesus' death who could and would still die. Either way, Jesus' resurrection did not change their hearts and minds and it is nowhere mentioned that they came to faith. 
As for Lazarus, perhaps the priests did not believe the story of Lazarus' resurrection and thought the story was made up. Since Lazarus was the "proof" then of this resurrection, he had to die. 
Knowing and having experienced all of this with Lazarus, they also knew what would have happened if Jesus' body were to be resurrected, which would cause much more of a turmoil among the people than Lazarus' resurrection. 
Even more remarkable is that the Resurrection is one of the topics that cannot be preached in #tags/china China in the government-controlled churches, together with Revelations, excorcism and Ezekiel. One would wonder why and think that these topics might contain the truth. #todo/opzoeken  #biblestudy/questions

***The Triumphal Entry***
*12 The next day the large crowd that had come to the feast heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem. 13 So they took branches of palm trees and went out to meet him, crying out, “Hosanna! Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord, even the King of Israel!” 14 And Jesus found a young donkey and sat on it, just as it is written,*
*15 “Fear not, daughter of Zion;*
*behold, your king is coming,*
*sitting on a donkey's colt!”*
*16 His disciples did not understand these things at first, but when Jesus was glorified, then they remembered that these things had been written about him and had been done to him.*

From this verse it appears that the disciples already knew about this verse from Zecheriah 9:9. I am amazed that they had even *read* this verse let alone remembered it. I can imagine that one would not immediately correlate what one has read with the actual actions of Jesus, as Jesus could have fulfilled many more prophecies every day during His life—for John 21:25 writes that all of the things Jesus did could not be contained in all the books of the world—but the fact that these simple fishermen had read a difficult book such as that of Zecheriah was unexpected to me. 
Many people in those days could not read, so the fact that one could read such a difficult book as the Bible is already hard to comprehend. I will assume—perhaps wrongly—that these men could already read, but it could also be that Jesus taught them to read the Bible. During those three years Jesus must have given the disciples an example of the real healthy Christian life, including many hours of prayer and Bible reading and Bible studying, of course—and better said *especially*—including the Major and Minor Prophets.

*17 The crowd that had been with him when he called Lazarus out of the tomb and raised him from the dead continued to bear witness. 18 The reason why the crowd went to meet him was that they heard he had done this sign.*

From the very beginning on, in John 6 for example, Jesus already tells the crowd that they are only following Him because of the miracles He is doing, though without recognizing that these miracles are signs showing Him to be the Messiah. Here too, in verse 18, Jesus attracts a crowd only because they want to be gratified. 
In the same way people of this present age do not truly care about the message their idol is bringing, if any, but they only care about gratification. Girls who look up to Justin Bieber do it because they want to have a boyfriend like he, because they want to be loved themselves. 

*19 So the Pharisees said to one another, “You see that you are gaining nothing. Look, the world has gone after him.”*

The Pharisees were right and wrong at the same time. The world was going after Jesus indeed and stopped following the Pharisees, but they only went after where He *was*, not after where He *went* to. Jesus directed them towards His Father, but instead they went for world pleasure, for food and instant gratification. #church/material
The Pharisees in that sense had nothing to worry about. All of their worrying and actions did not bring the people further from God. Rather, it was their final action during Jesus' time on Earth, the arrest that brought about the execution of Jesus, that brought them *closer* to God. It was through Jesus' torture and execution that some people—unfortunately only *some* and not all—saw the gentleness and meekness (notice that these are not the same, although they are both translated as *gentleness* in some translations) with which Jesus responded to the unrighteousness with which He was treated. 

***Some Greeks Seek Jesus***
*20 Now among those who went up to worship at the feast were some Greeks. 21 So these came to Philip, who was from Bethsaida in Galilee, and asked him, “Sir, we wish to see Jesus.” 22 Philip went and told Andrew; Andrew and Philip went and told Jesus. 23 And Jesus answered them, “The hour has come for the Son of Man to be glorified.*

Apparently this was the sign to Jesus—although He did not need a sign—that He would start this part of His ministry where He started proclaiming His oncoming death. #todo/opzoeken  klopt dit? and we also see that these are the last chapters of John. Everything is set in place now for Jesus' arrest and execution. 
It is striking though that this period is kicked off—or marked, if you will—by Greeks seeking Jesus. Jesus' ministry was not characterized by service to the Gentiles and so the breaking of this boundary of His "first" ministry to the Jews, "required" an extra act of service to render this possible. This does not mean that salvation of the Jews was possible without Jesus' death, but now the time had come, or in other words, the time had been *fulfilled* where God thought that enough time and proof had been given to the Jews and they would see Him no longer and His judgment would be executed. 
So with a single action—and God is both effective and efficient—God does the following things through Jesus' death and subsequently His resurrection: 
* the time is up for the Jews to choose who they want to follow. There is, of course, still time and opportunity for repentance after Jesus' resurrection, but their choice had led to Jesus' crucifixion which could not be turned back anymore;
* God has broken the boundary for the Gentiles to believe in God. Whereas this was already possible for select individuals, such as Ruth, Rahab and the Samaritans mentioned in the Gospels, the Jews were not *actively* called on to spread the Gospel to the Gentiles. 
* He has made salvation possible #todo/nogaftemaken by making payment for all the sin caused by man. 

*24 Truly, truly, I say to you, unless a grain of wheat falls into the earth and dies, it remains alone; but if it dies, it bears much fruit. 25 Whoever loves his life loses it, and whoever hates his life in this world will keep it for eternal life. 26 If anyone serves me, he must follow me; and where I am, there will my servant be also. If anyone serves me, the Father will honor him.*

Jesus is saying, in other words, that like a kernel, if one wants to keep his life, he will lose it anyway, because it stays alone. What is a life without friends, family or other neighbors? 
It would just be like a rich man with food in an area with poor people. The man would be all by himself, but he would miss out on the joy in his life. Sharing it would leave him with less of course, but would give him all the more joy and pleasure.
This is true for *sharing* one's food, for normal people. What more joy and life would this bring if one *dies* and not just for regular people, but for our *Lord* Jesus Christ? The reward would be unimaginably great. 

***The Son of Man Must Be Lifted Up***
*27 “Now is my soul troubled. And what shall I say? ‘Father, save me from this hour’? But for this purpose I have come to this hour. 28 Father, glorify your name.” Then a voice came from heaven: “I have glorified it, and I will glorify it again.” 29 The crowd that stood there and heard it said that it had thundered. Others said, “An angel has spoken to him.” 30 Jesus answered, “This voice has come for your sake, not mine.*

The words of God were for the people's sake, for their salvation, in order that they should know the Father or at least be instilled with fear for Him. Understanding the words the Father said, was not even of the biggest importance—the fact He has spoken and that it is interpreted as the Father speaking would already prove—at least to those who believed it—that the Father actually existed. Ignoring this miracle would cause one's own condemnation. It would have been too much of a coincidence that when Jesus asked the Father "**glorify Your Name**", the Father responded with—to them—the sound of thunder. 

*31 Now is the judgment of this world; now will the ruler of this world be cast out.*

The Satan, who is the ruler of this world, still has not been **cast out**. What would be meant by this? His defeat has been marked already, those whom the Lord has chosen, the Satan cannot bring back, and according to some theologies, those who choose the Lord will also be set free #biblestudy/theology/calvinism/osas. But the Satan is still in this world and ruling it. He will be cast out, in the end-times, but did the process of casting him out start here? 
It seems like the Satan's influence is only getting stronger. Perhaps this is what God intended, for He is waiting until His measure is full (#todo/opzoeken Genesis, God tells Abraham the Israelites ), before He decides to take action. For God could cast out the Satan right now, if He wanted to, but along with the weeds (see Jesus's parabel in ... #todo/opzoeken ) He would also throw away the harvest. It is for the sake of those He wants to keep, that the Satan still has time to roam the Earth, for those who live on Earth but have not accepted Christ yet, for whom God is patient, but also for those who are not born yet. 

*32 And I, when I am lifted up from the earth, will draw all people to myself.”*

#biblestudy/questions Not all people were drawn to Jesus literally, but perhaps all people in that city were "drawn" in the sense of amazement by the earthquake for example. That, however, would probably not have been what Jesus meant, for He sought no glory from people (cf. John 5:41), nor did He seek attention. Rather, Jesus said this as a contrast to what He said in verse 31. The ruler of this world is cast out and all the people he ruled over will not be drawn to Jesus. 
However, that still would not match reality, for the Satan had lost its power over the people when Jesus was Resurrected—although Satan has never been stronger than Jesus, not even before the Resurrection—but we see that even after the Resurrection many still followed the Satan instead of Jesus. 
There are two (or more) other things this could mean. First, Jesus could have meant that He drew all people to Himself, but that not everyone wanted to be drawn. It would be like someone calling for attention but not everyone would respond. Second, it could mean that Jesus *started drawing* everyone to Himself and that He is still working on this and will not finish until the day He comes back. Then, on that final Day of Judgment everyone *will be* drawn, whether they like it or not. There will be no other option, for whichever way they look, everything will be Jesus and all will kneel before Him and recognize Him and call out the Name of Jesus on their tongue, some reluctantly and others willingly, some out of fear and others out of praise.

*33 He said this to show by what kind of death he was going to die. 34 So the crowd answered him, “We have heard from the Law that the Christ remains forever. How can you say that the Son of Man must be lifted up? Who is this Son of Man?”*

Obviously the people understood that the uplifting was referring to the cross, because they associated this with death. It is remarkable that they did not know who the Son of Man was, since this should have been a well-known term used in the book of Daniel. The crowd could have been less educated in the Bible, but it still seems strange because why would they know that the Christ remains forever but not know who this Son of Man is?

*35 So Jesus said to them, “The light is among you for a little while longer. Walk while you have the light, lest darkness overtake you. The one who walks in the darkness does not know where he is going.*

Now is the time to walk, because when it gets dark one might walk in the wrong direction. At this moment, when Jesus was still alive, they could see what the truth was and what they should belive and Whom they should follow. However, would that mean that when Jesus died the light would be gone as well? What about current day Christians, do they not have the light? 
The answer is that this light of Christ is still present but it is now spread through the Christians. Wherever there are Christians this light is shown, but some places actually are without any light, for example when Christians have never been there or when all Christians have been killed, such as in Korea in 1866 along with Robert Jermain Thomas #tags/famouspeople/christian/missionaries. 
Korea has had, like all other countries, only darkness until God arrived on the scene in the 1700s when the first Catholic missionaries arrived there. That light, unfortunately was not enough to convict them of their sin and their sin only increased with the killing of almost all of these Catholic missionaries, their Korean converts and the only Protestant missionary mentioned above. One might (but note that this is my personal view) conclude that the current situation in North-Korea is a punishment for her crimes against Christianity. God has been merciful to the people and split the country in two, so that not all have to suffer, but the place where at least Robert Jermain Thomas was killed, in Pyongyang, which is in current day North-Korea, has become the place for God's affliction. 
One could also view this as an analogous event of North and South Israel which were split, initially for the salvation of the North Israelites, due to the rebellion of Solomon's son, Rehabeam, against God. God did not want the northern Israelites to be involved in this and gave them a fresh start. They, however, turned out to be even more rebellious against God than the South and eventually this division of the Kingdom of Israel has saved the lives of many Judahites. 
What shall we say then of the relatively innocent people, both in North-Korea and in North-Israel? Are they not punished for deeds they did not commit? The same question could be asked of all the prophets who were dragged into the same situation as their fellow Israelites who were much less holy, such as Jeremiah and Daniel, and this question has been answered already. As a short recapitulation, no one is innocent, and when one is allowed to work for God, in whatever circumstances, it is only by His mercy that they can have this opportunity.

*36 While you have the light, believe in the light, that you may become sons of light.”*

If one believes in the light, he will become a son of the light. This means that you will become a child of what you believe in. This also goes for evil. When one believes in evil, and follows the evil, he becomes a son of evil. 
Now the word *son* stands for a representation of the father. So a son of light represents the light and others will see the source of the light reflected by, or shining through, you—the same goes for evil. But being a *son* also means you are capable of conceiving more children. A son of light will conceive children of light, but a son of darkness and evil will create more evil in this world. 
Is it not peculiar then that Jesus mentions that this light is only here temporary, which indicates that darkness will be present even longer? This would mean that the darkness has more opportunity to create more children than we do, given the same rate of conception. How then would it ever be possible to outshine the darkness? 
The answer is that light has the unique characteristic of being and having intrinsic energy. Light is not like a bullet that *needs* energy in order to fly, but rather yet light is energy and it is light at the same time whereas darkness is present at a single location but does not have any energy to spread. A single source of light can light up an enormous area—theoretically speaking the distance a single ray of light can go is even unlimited—but only a little bit, depending on the strength of the light source. Additional sources of light will only strengthen the effect of that first source of light. In a dark room with one candle in the middle those areas near the candle will light up most, and the more candles there are near this original candle, the bigger the area gets that will light up brightly. 
Spreading these candles across the room, theoretically would not have any effect. The same amount of lumen is produced by a fixed number of candles, but if—in this example—a certain amount of lumen per square centimeter is needed before the surface area will light up, then it would be quicker to have these candles placed together before one sees the first results. 
Bringing this example into practise, we can say that spreading the Gospel a single and separate Christians will bring out the light and everyone will receive seeds and water, but when those Christians—or churches for that matter—work together the *intensity* of this light is much greater people will be affected by it much quicker. This is why so many people "experience" the Holy Spirit and become much more susceptible after attending a three- or four-day Christian conference, being surrounded by Christians, Christian music, Christian programs and seminars and most of all Christian love. 
I am not saying, however, that one will ultimately become a Christian when he has been exposed to this light long enough. No, some people—or areas, as in our example—are like black holes. They suck up light continuously and unendingly and no matter how much light is given to it, they never reflect anything back. But for those who are not black holes, those who are chosen by God, these people will come to Christ much faster given they are in the right circumstances. 

***The Unbelief of the People***
*When Jesus had said these things, he departed and hid himself from them. 37 Though he had done so many signs before them, they still did not believe in him, 38 ::so that the word spoken by the prophet Isaiah might be fulfilled:::*

Jesus could have done anything to save the world, but some still would not have believed in Him, not because Isaiah said it, but because God willed it. In the same way we can pray and Evangelize all we can to save a specific person, but if God does not want this person to be saved, he will not believe in Jesus. This is a very difficult position for us to understand and to take, for it requires perseverance and trust in God. We do not know which people God does not will to believe in Him and perhaps neither did Jesus at specific moments (though not in John 17 where He knows which ones are given to Him), so we have to continue working for Christ. 
If Jesus had known in the past few years when he was doing signs, that some would not believe in Him, that would have been even worse for Jesus, for that would mean that Jesus was healing people and working signs and miracles, knowing not only that these would all be for nothing, but also that this would send the people to hell (see John 15:22-24). 

*“Lord, who has believed what he heard from us,*
*and to whom has the arm of the Lord been ::revealed::?”*
*39 Therefore they could not believe. For again Isaiah said,*
*40 “He has blinded their eyes*
*and hardened their heart,*
*lest they see with their eyes,*
*and understand with their heart, and ::turn::,*
*and I would heal them.”*

This part indicates that if the Israelites were turn from their wicked ways, God would have healed them. This is regardless of whether one has been elected or not. Everyone who turns and repents will be healed. However, I do assume this is healing in the sense of healing the land, making it fruitful again and bringing social and economic peace as well. In that sense the Law of God applies to all. Everyone who obeys God's rules for life will have peace of mind—if only because of their conscience—and receive blessing from God. These are—as always—under the sovereignty of God but thus far I have seen no exceptions. Those who raise up their children well, get respect and honor from their children. Those who put God and His Law first, will be respected by those around him. 

*41 Isaiah said these things because he saw his glory and spoke of him. 42 Nevertheless, many even of the authorities believed in him, but for ::fear of the Pharisees:: they did not confess it, so that they would not be put out of the synagogue; 43 for they loved the glory that comes from man more than the glory that comes from God.*

The fear in verse 42 and the love in 43 do not contradict each other. 1 John 4:18 says that fear cannot coexist with perfect love and this is a good example of that. Both their love for God as for the Pharisees is not perfect. If they loved the Pharisees perfectly, they would not fear the punishment of being put out of the synagogue and if they loved God perfectly, they would not love the Pharisees more than God. 

***Jesus Came to Save the World***
*44 And Jesus cried out and said, “Whoever believes in me, believes not in me but in him who sent me. 45 And whoever sees me sees him who sent me. 46 I have come into the world as light, so that whoever believes in me may not remain in darkness. 47 If anyone hears my words and does not keep them, I do not judge him; for I did not come to judge the world but to save the world. 48 The one who rejects me and does not receive my words has a judge; the word that I have spoken will judge him on the last day.*

What comes to mind here is the situation where David was mocked by Shimei, when he was #todo/opzoeken/engels exiled, expelled, cast away, chased down, niet zozeer achternagezeten of muiterij, maar het seizen van de troon, by his own son, Absalom, in 2 Samuel 16:11. David had not judged him back then, although he did expect retribution which would eventually come in 1 Kings 2:36ff. 
In a sense, Jesus is saying here that He does not *have* to judge anyone, for what they have done will be the proof that judges them. 
There is a difference between a person who judges and the word he has spoken that judges. In the first case when the person judges, it is the person who decides whether the plaintiff is guilty or not. In the second case the words that are spoken by the judge are the objective standard and a person is not needed to judge one's guilt. In fact a robot could judge a plaintiff by merely applying these words as a rule. I think this is what Jesus means with His words in verse 48. On the last day, Jesus Himself and His judgment will not even be needed. What He has said in the past will be sufficient to separate the sheep from the goats. There is no grey area, Jesus' words are clear enough for us to see things black and white. 

*49 For I have not spoken on my own authority, but the Father who sent me has himself given me a commandment—what to say and what to speak. 50 And I know that his commandment is eternal life. What I say, therefore, I say as the Father has told me.”*

For a normal person it would be arrogant to say that not he himself, but his words will judge another, for with normal persons one's words are the same as the person's judgment. Now Jesus is not a normal person, so He is allowed to say something like this, but even He takes a step back, implying humility, and stating that His words are not His, but His Father's. 
Jesus *does* state here that He has been sent by the Father, and so He implies that first of all that His words are His Father's and second of all that He has the authority to speak on behalf of His Father. 
What I find most beautiful about this part is that the Father's commandment is *eternal life*. He is telling us all of this in order to give us eternal life. It is not a side-effect, but the main purpose. Jesus says this as well in verse 47 about His reason for coming to this world. 

#biblestudy/devotionals/john
