# John 9 (LSB)
### Jesus Heals a Man Born Blind
**John 9:1**   As He passed by, He saw a man blind from birth. **2** And His disciples asked Him, saying, “aRabbi, who sinned, bthis man or his cparents, that he would be born blind?” **3** Jesus answered, “Neither this man nor his parents sinned, but *this was* so athat the works of God might be manifested in him. **4** “We must work the works of Him who sent Me aas long as it is day; night is coming when no one can work.

The night that Jesus is speaking about is not the same period as the twelve hours of darkness in John 11 (according to the interpretation written there). This is referring to the time that Jesus is still in the world. 

**5** “While I am in the world, I am athe light of the world.” 

What happens if Jesus is not in the world, for example after Ascension and before His incarnation? Is He then not the light of the world anymore? After Jesus' ascension His disciples, that is all Christians, are reflections of His light. His light is shining from heaven and we are like mirrors reflecting His light. Before His incarnations the true believers had this function, such as Anna and Simeon.

**6** When He had said this, He aspat on the ground, made clay of the saliva, and rubbed the clay on his eyes, **7** and said to him, “Go, wash in athe pool of Siloam” (which is translated, Sent). So he went away and bwashed, and ccame*back* seeing. **8** Therefore the neighbors, and those who previously saw him as a beggar, were saying, “Is not this the one who used to asit and beg?” **9** Others were saying, “This is he,” *still* others were saying, “No, but he is like him.” 1He kept saying, “I am the one.” **10** So they were saying to him, “How then were your eyes opened?” **11** He answered, “The man who is called Jesus made clay, and rubbed my eyes, and said to me, ‘Go to aSiloam and wash’; so when I went away and washed, I received sight.” **12** And they said to him, “Where is He?” He said, “I do not know.”

Jesus did not ask the man if he wanted to see and there is no hint that the man resisted a stranger putting clay with saliva on his eyes. Perhaps he had already heard of Jesus and believed in so much as that he should at least obey His command to wash his eyes. 

### Controversy over the Man Born Blind
**John 9:13**   They brought to the Pharisees the man who was formerly blind. **14** aNow it was a Sabbath on the day when Jesus made the clay and opened his eyes. **15** aSo the Pharisees also were asking him again how he received his sight. And he said to them, “He applied clay to my eyes, and I washed, and I see.” **16** So then some of the Pharisees were saying, “This man is not from God, because He adoes not keep the Sabbath.” But others were saying, “How can a sinful man do such 1bsigns?” And cthere was a division among them. 

The **others** concluded that a **man [...] not from God** is equal to a **sinful man**. They most likely mean that the sinful man is one who *keeps sinning* (cf. 1 John 3). The latter statement might be true, for one who keeps sinning could "probably" not do these signs, although these signs can be done by the power of the devil and God sometimes works through sinners. However, **some of the Pharisees** were wrong in saying that Jesus **is not from God** merely because He trespassed one sin in their sight. This does not mean that Jesus *practices* sin. Thus, some of these Pharisees are very shortsighted, drawing conclusions based on one event and also not having the right interpretation of Scripture, because healing is one thing that is allowed even on the Sabbath. 

**17** Therefore, they said to the blind man aagain, “What do you say about Him, since He opened your eyes?” And he said, “He is a bprophet.”

Why would the man say that Jesus was a prophet if Jesus only healed His eyes? As the definition of a prophet is someone who hears God and speaks God's message to the people. Perhaps he knew only of prophets who could heal, such as Elijah and Elisha. In fact, the man was true, for no other person in Biblical history until that time had ever healed anyone unless he was a prophet. It was only after Jesus had sent out seventy disciples of His that normal men started healing others in the Name of Jesus. 
Note that not all prophets could heal or do miracles (cf. John 10:41). 

**John 9:18**   aThen, the Jews did not ::believe::*it* of him that he was blind and had received sight, until they called the parents of the very one who had received his sight, **19** and questioned them, saying, “Is this your son, who you say was born blind? Then how does he now see?” **20** So his parents answered and said, “We know that this is our son, and that he was born blind; **21** but how he now sees, we do not know; or who opened his eyes, we do not know. Ask him; he is of age, he will speak for himself.” **22** His parents said this because they awere afraid of the Jews; for the Jews bhad already agreed that if anyone confessed Him to be 1Christ, che was to be put out of the synagogue. **23** For this reason his parents said, “aHe is of age; ask him.”

The parents were afraid to confess Jesus **to be Christ**, is that the reason why they said that they did not know **who opened his eyes**? If they truly had not known, and had only heard that Jesus had done this—and most likely this was true, because they did not seem to be present when their son' eyes were healed—they would not have to be afraid. They could have said: "We have *heard* it was Jesus Who opened his eyes, but we were not present to witness it" and then they would not have be afraid of being **put out of the synagogue**. Also, even if they had seen it themselves and could testify of Jesus' works, they still would not have **confessed Him to be Christ** but merely stated a fact, unless the Pharisees thought the act of healing a blind man in and of itself was sufficient to be the Christ. Perhaps this is because  the Bible has no description of any blind man ever being healed, but it does say that God is the eyes of the blind (Job 29:15) and that He opens the eyes of the blind (Psalm 146:8). 

**John 9:24**   Therefore, a second time they called the man who had been blind, and said to him, “aGive glory to God; we know that bthis man is a sinner.”

Now that the Jews had spoken to the healed man's parents, they could not ignore the fact that **the man had been blind**. Still, however, they did not believe it. Very likely none of these Jews, the leaders of the synagogue (as they had the power to put people out of the synagogue), had ever seen this man, or they would not have needed the evidence. There is a reason, in my personal view, why after all these years none of them had ever seen the blind man. Perhaps there were too many in the city to recognize this specific one, or perhaps the Jews avoided contact with the blind in order to stay clean (see Leviticus where no son of Aaron may become a priest if he is blind #todo/opzoeken/reference ). I think that God made sure that no one had ever seen or recognized this man, however, so that they would stay blind. God has said in His Word before that He does not let them understand, lest they soften their hearts and God did not intend for them to do so, because of His sovereign plan. 

Note that the Jews wanted to take away the glory of Jesus, claiming that by some coincident the man who had been blind was healed. How ironic it is to tell the man to not give glory to Jesus but **give glory to God** when Jesus Himself is God. 

**25** He then answered, “Whether He is a sinner, I do not know; one thing I do know, that though I was blind, now I see.” **26** So they said to him, “What did He do to you? How did He open your eyes?” **27** He answered them, “aI told you already and you did not blisten. Why do you want to listen again? Do you want to become His disciples too?” **28** And they reviled him and said, “You are His disciple, but awe are disciples of Moses. **29** “We know that God has spoken to Moses, but as for this man, awe do not know where He is from.” **30** The man answered and said to them, “Well, here is a marvelous thing, that you do not know where He is from, and He opened my eyes. **31** “We know that aGod does not listen to sinners; but if anyone is God-fearing and does His will, He listens to him. **32** “1Since the beginning of time it has never been heard that anyone opened the eyes of a person born blind. **33** “aIf this man were not from God, He could do nothing.” **34** They answered and said to him, “aYou were born entirely in sins, and are you teaching us?” So they bput him out.

### Jesus Affirms His Deity
**John 9:35**   Jesus heard that they had aput him out, and after finding him, He said, “Do you believe in the bSon of Man?” **36** He answered and said, “aWho is He, 1Lord, that I may believe in Him?” **37** Jesus said to him, “You have both seen Him, and aHe is the one who is talking with you.” **38** And he said, “Lord, I believe.” And he aworshiped Him. **39** And Jesus said, “aFor judgment I came into this world, so that bthose who do not see may see, and that cthose who see may become blind.” **40** Some of the Pharisees who were with Him heard these things and said to Him, “aAre we blind too?” **41** Jesus said to them, “aIf you were blind, you would have no sin; but now*that* you say, ‘bWe see,’ your sin remains.

#biblestudy/devotionals/john