# Isaiah 36
#biblestudy/devotionals/isaiah

**Sennacherib Invades Judah**
*1 In the fourteenth year of King Hezekiah, Sennacherib king of Assyria came up against all the fortified cities of Judah and took them. 2 And the king of Assyria sent the Rabshakeh from Lachish to King Hezekiah at Jerusalem, with a great army. And he stood by the conduit of the upper pool on the highway to the Washer's Field. 3 And there came out to him Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, who was over the household, and Shebna the secretary, and Joah the son of Asaph, the recorder.*
*4 And the Rabshakeh said to them, “Say to Hezekiah, ‘Thus says the great king, the king of Assyria: On what do you rest this trust of yours? 5 Do you think that mere words are strategy and power for war? In whom do you now trust, that you have rebelled against me? 6 Behold, you are trusting in Egypt, that broken reed of a staff, which will pierce the hand of any man who leans on it. Such is Pharaoh king of Egypt to all who trust in him. 7 But if you say to me, “We trust in the Lord our God,” is it not he whose high places and altars Hezekiah has removed, saying to Judah and to Jerusalem, “You shall worship before this altar”? 8 Come now, make a wager with my master the king of Assyria: I will give you two thousand horses, if you are able on your part to set riders on them. 9 How then can you repulse a single captain among the least of my master's servants, when you trust in Egypt for chariots and for horsemen? 10 Moreover, is it without the Lord that I have come up against this land to destroy it? The Lord said to me, “Go up against this land and destroy it.”’”*

Now it is not for sure that the Rabshakeh has heard the Lord telling him to destroy it, although only in hindsight we know that he was able to. It could have been that the words of Isaiah had spread to Assyria, although this is highly unlikely. But still, even if he were bluffing, he was bluffing the right way—the Rabshakeh told them something only the Judahites could have known. 
However, for a few minutes they had forgotten that they could appeal to God. Even if God wanted the Assyrians to go up against Judah and Jerusalem, does that mean God wanted Assyria to win? No, rather yet, God has more than once shown in history that he incites people or peoples to do things which eventually causes their own demise. 
Note that God is not sadistic but purely righteous, for He only gives the people what they long for #todo/opzoeken  somewhere in the New Testament there is a reference for that, which eventually led to homosexuality. 
One example of this, perhaps the most well known one, is the example pharaoh who did not want to let the Israelites go and caused on himself and his people the plagues and ultimately the death of his son. 
So next time we hear of bad news and we confirmed in it that it is God Who has *allowed* this to happen, this does not mean this cannot be #todo/opzoeken  afgewend 
anymore; We can plead! Even more so, Jesus Christ has given us the Holy Spirit through Whom we can plead and even Jesus Christ Himself will plead for us at His Father's throne! 

Israel had indeed made a mistake in trusting in Egypt. I am not sure whether they already had alliances with them before or after Assyria took over this part of the world, and perhaps Israel always had it in mind to go to Egypt as a backup just in case some world power would rise its head. 
So I am not aware of which is the cause. Did God send Assyria because Israel was unfaithful in this matter and of course because she worshipped idols? Or did God send Assyria first (due to the worship of idols) to test her loyalty? 
Whatever is the case, Israel was at fault here. As gracious as God is, even when we are at fault, we still have a case to plead. A normal judge would perhaps not even look at the case and dismiss it or send judgment on us right away, but God gives us a chance not only to escape the judgment of things as bad as idolatry and unfaithfulness, but He lets His judgment rain on our enemies as well. They too, of course, needed to punished for their own actions of war crimes and mostly their attack on God's children in the northern provinces of Israel.
There is not a single honest and righteous judge on Earth who will let us get away with the punishments we deserve for our infidelities and other sins, yet God does forgive us, because He is sovereign and because He has paid the price Himself, 700 years later on the cross. 	

*11 Then Eliakim, Shebna, and Joah said to the Rabshakeh, “Please speak to your servants in Aramaic, for we understand it. Do not speak to us in the language of Judah within the hearing of the people who are on the wall.” 12 But the Rabshakeh said, “Has my master sent me to speak these words to your master and to you, and not to the men sitting on the wall, who are doomed with you to eat their own dung and drink their own urine?”*
*13 Then the Rabshakeh stood and called out in a loud voice in the language of Judah: “Hear the words of the great king, the king of Assyria! 14 Thus says the king: Do not let Hezekiah deceive you, for he will not be able to deliver you. 15 Do not let Hezekiah make you trust in the Lord by saying, “The Lord will surely deliver us. This city will not be given into the hand of the king of Assyria.” 16 Do not listen to Hezekiah. For thus says the king of Assyria: Make your peace with me and come out to me. Then each one of you will eat of his own vine, and each one of his own fig tree, and each one of you will drink the water of his own cistern, 17 until I come and take you away to a land like your own land, a land of grain and wine, a land of bread and vineyards. 18 Beware lest Hezekiah mislead you by saying, “The Lord will deliver us.” Has any of the gods of the nations delivered his land out of the hand of the king of Assyria? 19 Where are the gods of Hamath and Arpad? Where are the gods of Sepharvaim? Have they delivered Samaria out of my hand? 20 Who among all the gods of these lands have delivered their lands out of my hand, that the Lord should deliver Jerusalem out of my hand?’”*

The Rabshakeh is deceiving the people into committing one of the worst sins. Making peace with him is the first problem. God is telling us not to make peace with those who are unfaithful to His Law. Not only is Sennacherib, on whose behalf the Rabshakeh is speaking, an idolator, he is also a cruel murderer, subduing everyone on his own authority as if he is God Himself, a dictator and many other things, none of which are good. 
Of course we should love our enemies, but in certain situations where they have power, we should take off their throne. What God means by peace is not becoming like our enemies and most certainly not giving in to their wishes. 
The second sin is that each gets his own vine, fig tree and cistern. Not only are you accepting material things from an enemy, which in a sense is bribery—bribed to move away from your king and follow Sennacherib—but you are also not living according to the peace that God wants, which is the third sin. God has given us this world to share and still have peace. That is what peace really means. It would not be peace if everyone lived on his own farm and never had to interact with others. 
The fourth sin is disloyalty to the king of Israel, Hezekiah, with a fifth attached to it, which is disloyalty to God, for the king of Israel, especially in this case, is associated to the God of Israel. By following Sennacherib we are implying what he himself said through the Rabshakeh, namely that God cannot deliver Israel. We are diminishing God's power and might. 
The seventh sin is to be led away from our promised land, which is Israel. Sennacherib promises to give a land *like* it, but we should not go for anything less than the real thing.
Each of these promises, how beautiful they may sound and prosperous for the people, are in fact deceptions and poisonous, destroying the people of Israel, not literally, not quickly, but slowly yet certain. 
These deceptions are causing the Israelites
*  to lose their connection and relation with each other, for Sennacherib would (as we have learned from history and know this in hindsight) move the Jews and others peoples across various regions in the world, so that they would not rise up
* to forget their God, believe that He cannot redeem them and follow other gods instead
* to abandon His perfect Law and the real peace God has intended for people
* to forget their land, which is more than just fertile ground, but which has a unique and central place in the world from where the could reach out to three continents to spread the gospel, to be a light in the middle of the Middle East as the only democratic country, showing the rest of the world, i.e. Europe, America and Asia and Australia, that it is Judeo-Christian values that change the nation and society and that *not* all cultures and ideas are equal. 

Summarizing, they would lose their moral values, their ideology, their way of living, their purpose

God = worship
Spread across various nations = relation
Losing moral values, being bribed into disloyalty to God and king, not according to the Law = discipleship
No peace, but own land and cistern = servanthood
Land = evangelism

#church/material  

*21 But they were silent and answered him not a word, for the king's command was, “Do not answer him.” 22 Then Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, who was over the household, and Shebna the secretary, and Joah the son of Asaph, the recorder, came to Hezekiah with their clothes torn, and told him the words of the Rabshakeh.*

The best way in cases of temptation is to not give in. How does one do that? Not by fighting it, but by fleeing it. This action is often laden or looked upon with shame and fear. Just like Joseph fled when Potifar's wife seduced him, when he could have just stood up and given her a stern *no*, even keeping his clothes with him instead leaving them behind, which eventually became the evidence for his imprisonment. 
But Joseph knew his own limits and perhaps Potifar's wife was very attractive, and Joseph himself, of course, had never had a wife before and being at the height of his physical prowess and manhood, there is a good chance his hormones starting acting. *If you cannot beat it, flee it*, is what I would say. Joseph did the right thing. 
Now in the case of Eliakim, Shebna and Joah, they were instructed to be silent and not fight against it. The result and impact of the Rabshakeh's words were devastating and most certainly faith crushing for at lease some Israelites. But had Eliakim's started an argument and lost it, would the result then not have been even worse? It is certain that they were in high emotions, for their clothes were torn—I am assuming they were doing this out of upright #todo/opzoeken  het gevoel van boosheid en verdriet
over the mocking of the Lord. In such cases it is best not to say anything, for the wrong kind and choice of words could be said—and words cannot be taken back. This, by the way, goes for any discussion, especially those in marriage. 
Know then that the best decision is not always the one that looks best to others, but may very well be the one in which we are the weakest.

#church/material #tags/lgbt