# Isaiah 20 (NIV) 
**A Prophecy Against Egypt and Cush**
*1 In the year that the supreme commander, sent by Sargon king of Assyria, came to Ashdod and attacked and captured it— 2 at that time the Lord spoke through Isaiah son of Amoz. He said to him, “Take off the sackcloth from your body and the sandals from your feet.” And he did so, going around stripped and barefoot.*
*3 Then the Lord said, “Just as my servant Isaiah has gone stripped and barefoot for three years, as a sign and portent against Egypt and Cush, 4 so the king of Assyria will lead away stripped and barefoot the Egyptian captives and Cushite exiles, young and old, with buttocks bared —to Egypt’s shame. 5 Those who trusted in Cush and boasted in Egypt will be dismayed and put to shame. 6 In that day the people who live on this coast will say, ‘See what has happened to those we relied on, those we fled to for help and deliverance from the king of Assyria! How then can we escape? ’”*

Here too, God predicts through Isaiah that three years from the Assyrians will win from both Egypt and Cush. Not only does Isaiah predict this, he shows it by taking off his clothes and sandals and walking bare-feet and perhaps or half-naked for three years. That is a major proof of foresight to all people in Judah. 
Still, the [Judeans] fled to Egypt and neglected the former part in Chapter 19, where God said the Egyptians would seek help from Judah and come to Jerusalem and convert. The showing of Isaiah for a period of *three years* were also not alarming enough, just like Ezekiel's symbols were not, when he lied on his side for more than three years and ate bread baked on cow dung. Unfortunately the Israelites really had to see until the end of the three years, before they could see the prophecy coming true. 
In a sense, there was no escaping from this truth. For what God has said or planned, so it will be (cf. Isaiah 42:17) #todo/opzoeken  welk vers? 
and no one can thwart God or turn back His hand. So in that sense, it was a warning, but not something the Judaites could do anything about. Perhaps some did see the warning and repented before the three years were over. Although these people would then have changed their lives, they were still part of Judah and the war it would be in in the near future. But the saving of the soul is more important than of the body. 
There is, however, no way that everyone would listen to Isaiah's prophecy, for then God's prophecy would not come true. On the other hand, God already knew Judah would not repent and perhaps all of Judah would not repent. But using this prophecy at least some would repent and worship the power of God. 

#biblestudy/devotionals/isaiah
