# Isaiah 39 (ESV) 
#biblestudy/devotionals/isaiah 

**Envoys from Babylon**
*1 At that time Merodach-baladan the son of Baladan, king of Babylon, sent envoys with letters and a present to Hezekiah, for he heard that he had been sick and had recovered. 2 And Hezekiah welcomed them gladly. And he showed them his treasure house, the silver, the gold, the spices, the precious oil, his whole armory, all that was found in his storehouses. There was nothing in his house or in all his realm that Hezekiah did not show them.* 

Hezekiah *welcomed* them. That is one thing I have questions about concerning the safety of a land. In modern countries we do not simply welcome others in our land, let alone in government buildings, let alone in times of war! But Hezekiah did and there was no control or resistance, as far as we know. I suppose there were no rules for that either. Would any government official had to ask the king himself before anyone could enter the kingdom or the official buildings? That would be a great administrative work. 
The best thing for Hezekiah to do was to create a culture of speaking up to a king, to let a man freely say what he wants without being hanged. I suppose the people, at least his officials, knew he was not such a king, but perhaps out of fear of the other kings they had seen before him, they did not question a king's wish. Only prophets did so, out of a higher authority, which is God. 
The second thing Hezekiah did (wrong) is the attitude with which he welcomed the Babylonians, which is, he did it *gladly*. In other words, he was glad to show off his trophies and all that is in his house. Perhaps he knew in his heart that all of it was given to him by God, but he knew that he, Hezekiah himself, would be the one to get the honor for it. 
The same it is when people with certain talents are complimented—myself included. They know everything was given to them by God, but they *like* receiving honor as if *they* have done all the work, but they do not realize, that God prepared the work beforehand (cf. #todo ) and that everything is created *by* God (i.e. all talents) and *for* God (cf. #todo/opzoeken . ) Yes, the have put some effort in it, but just as much effort as most others have put in their work. Has an Olympic medalist worked harder than his competitors? I doubt it, perhaps even less hard. It is through genetics, God-given talents and traits (some of which are genetically related, others are mental, such as discipline and intelligence), the condition of the circumstances (among which luck) and effort through training that a sportsman wins. The latter is man's effort, but the former three are all given by God. However, even the latter contains a big amount which is decided by God. One may have the effort, but has he got the money and spare time to train? 
So everything is from God.

*3 Then Isaiah the prophet came to King Hezekiah, and said to him, “What did these men say?*

Hezekiah did not answer the first question about what these men said. The text also does not say much, except that they came to congratulate Hezekiah with his recovery. That to me already seems like a strange thing. A few questions come to mind then. How did they know that? Were they friends at all? Why would someone send envoys and a present just for one's recovery? 
The last question is easily answered in current times when there is no war and when neighboring countries can be trusted. Especially when you are related to someone it is custom to send a present or to bring one when you visit them when they have recovered from a serious illness. But sending envoys is over the top and there must be a hidden meaning behind that. 
Again I say, Hezekiah should have asked his advisors and especially God, to see if anything was wrong with this gesture and visit from Babylon. 

*And from where did they come to you?” Hezekiah said, “They have come to me from a far country, from Babylon.” 4 He said, “What have they seen in your house?” Hezekiah answered, “They have seen all that is in my house. There is nothing in my storehouses that I did not show them.”*

Isaiah asked even though he already knew the answer. God asked Adam questions, even though He knows everything, and Adam knew that God knew everything as well. Would Adam not have thought about that? Would Adam not have known that God would even know they were hiding and where they were hiding? So why was Adam hiding then. Out of shame, even though God created him and could see through his clothes? 
This makes no sense. But it is all due to sin. Sin causes things not to make sense. It causes Adam to lie—sort of—by blaming Eve, even though he knows that God knows the truth. Sin causes us to be selfish in such a sense that we are even willing to give up what is most important to us, our relationship with our spouses and with God. Do we think sin is more important than our relationships? Rationally, no, but in practice, yes. Who would say that pleasure is more important than health? Yet everyone enjoys alcohol, fat and sugar which are disastrous for one's brains, organs and blood.
In other words, sin causes us to destroy ourselves and to *choose* for that. #church/material

*5 Then Isaiah said to Hezekiah, “Hear the word of the Lord of hosts: 6 Behold, the days are coming, when all that is in your house, and that which your fathers have stored up till this day, shall be carried to Babylon. Nothing shall be left, says the Lord. 7 And some of your own sons, who will come from you, whom you will father, shall be taken away, and they shall be eunuchs in the palace of the king of Babylon.” 8 Then Hezekiah said to Isaiah, “The word of the Lord that you have spoken is good.” For he thought, “There will be peace and security in my days.”*

The peace and security Hezekiah speaks of are not due to his own efforts. It is by grace that God grants him this peace. Hezekiah did wrong and for that he needed to be punished, but God granted him peace in his lifetime, to punish his sons #todo/opzoeken opposite of ancestors, nageslacht
afterwards, though his sons incurred that punishment on themselves. 

Was Hezekiah selfish in thinking that at least he would not be stricken by this attack of Babylon? If he was sincere in saying "the word of the Lord [...] is good", then this means that he was content with any decision of God. This would mean that if God had said (through Isaiah) that the punishment would occur the next day, Hezekiah would have been content as well. 
But since it is not in his own days, but in the days of his sons, it is good as well because then it means that God gives punishment to those whoever are alive at that moment, in this case to his sons, who deserved it. 
Isaiah does add, however, the line "For he thought...in my days". If that is his *only* thought, then that is selfish, but if that is a thought next to the feelings explained above, then it is completely natural that a person is happy to be on the safe side whenever God gives something. Who would not be happy, for example, when he gets to receive a million dollars? Of course your thought would also be "whatever God gives to whichever person is good", but it would be completely natural to be happy with that gift as well. 

About the question whether this was Hezekiah's only thought, Josephus wrote in his annals that Hezekiah humbled himself and for this reason God let go of him after his mistake, i.e. no punishment was inflicted in the remainder of his lifetime. This seems strange, for God *first* said He would not inflict Hezekiah, instead of seeing Hezekiah's response first and then basing his decision whether to punish him or not. On the other hand, God does not need to see or test people. He already knows their answer and behavior before telling the people anything at all. 
So God already knew Hezekiah would humble himself after hearing this, if we may assume what Josephus wrote was correct. 